a The m i 

Ayurveda 

Encyclopedia 

Natural Secrets to 
Healing, Prevention, & Longevity 

HERBOLOGY • NUTRITION • PANCHA KARMA 
AROMATHERAPY • HATHA YOGA • PRANAYAMA 
MEDITATION • SOUND THERAPY • COLOR THERAPY 
GEM THERAPY • EXERCISE • LIFESTYLE COUNSELING 
SPIRITUAL COUNSELING • CIRCULATORY SYSTEM 
DIGESTIVE SYSTEM • RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 
URINARY SYSTEM • NERVOUS SYSTEM 
REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM • IMMUNE SYSTEM 



METABOLIC SYSTEM • INFECTIONS AND WOUNDS 
SKIN • PET CARE • AND MORE 

- * 


SWAMI SADA SHIVA TIRTHA 








The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Natural Secrets to 
Healing, Prevention & Longevity 


Swami Sadashiva Tirtha 


Technical Editor: 
Dr. R.C. Uniyal 


Contributing Editors: 

Dr. S. Sandhu, Dr. J. K. Chandhok 





Professional Praise for the Ayurveda Encyclopedia 
More than 14,000 copies sold! 


Magazine Reviews 
EDITOR’S CHOICE! 

“...a comprehensive, detailed primer for serious students of Ayurveda, (yet) its design and layout is 
also “lay-person-friendly:” Indeed it is one of the better...texts...; clarifies)...Ayurveda for the 
Western readers ...provides a deeper insight into the spiritual foundations of Ayurveda; a complete 
analysis of how diseases are caused and...progress...Best of all (the) approach is refreshingly 
honest.” The Bodhi Tree Review 

“You could buy a half-dozen plus books on Ayurveda to start your reference library, or you could 
buy...(this) Encyclopedia. It’s detailed enough for the professional, but accessible to the lay 
person...It is useful and entertaining for any student of Ayurveda or as a home self-healing 
resource...(a) magnum opus.” Hinduism Today 

“...you‘ll be delighted to discover this comprehensive guide...” 

Herb Research News (Herb Research Foundation) 

“(one of) the better ‘good reads’...a four-part...encyclopedia...also contains useful appendixes 
with features such as client health history form as well as an Ayurvedic glossary.” 

Natural Pharmacy 


Ayurvedic Doctors 

“The Ayurveda Encyclopedia is an important reference volume for all students of Ayurveda and 
Yoga, almost a complete course in Ayurveda in itself. Swami Sada Shiva Tirtha has done a 
monumental work in putting together so much material in such a concise and clear manner for the 
modern reader.” Dr. David Frawley (Vamadeva Shastri); 

Director: American Institute of Vedic Studies 


Medical Professionals 

For me, this is the next best book after Harrison’s Internal Medicine Text. I think every doctor 
should read this book for better insights into the entire psycho-physiologic makeup of his or her 
patients” Patrick J. Conte MD; Radiologist - New Jersey 

“...gives a (spiritual) perspective that is lacking in the current alternative literature.” 

Robert Pincus, MD 

“...a ‘must have’ reference for any health professional involved in integrative medicine. (The author) 
has brought an ancient complex teaching into a fully usable western form, that can aid both the 
practitioner and the patient to use Ayurvedic Medicine as part of a wholistic, life-enhancing 
program.” Ellen Kamhi PhD RN HNC (“The Natural Nurse ”)/Author 

“This is an excellent reference book for the pharmaceutical industry for developing formulations 
to meet the rising demand of customers. It’s the Merck Manual of Ayurveda.” 

Bharat Shulka, President - Pharm-Tech Industries 


^Mjclxrlxrajjcjci-L 


The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 



Dedicated to His Holiness 1008 Sri Sri Srimat Swami Narayan Tirthaji Maharaj 


1915-2001 







The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 



Dhanwantari: Divine father of Ayurvedic Medicine 



Maharisi Bharadwaj: Human father of Ayurvedic Medicine 










The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


© Copyright 1998 Swami Sada Shiva Tirtha; All rights reserved 
Fifth Printing - 2005 


No part of this book may be used or reproduced in any way without written consent from the 
publisher except for brief quotations used in critical articles and reviews. 


Publisher 

Ayurveda Holistic Center Press 

82A Bayville Ave 
Bayville, NY 11709 USA 
http ://ayurvedahc .com/ 


ISBN 0-9658042-2-4 


Library of Congress Catalog Card Number 97-077845 


Edited by Guru Amrit Kaur Khalsa and Rob Paton of Caduceus Press, NJ 
Book cover design by Linda Parks; Boulder, Colorado 

This book is a reference manual, and is not intended to treat, diagnose, or prescribe. 
The information in this book is in no way intended to substitute for health consultations 

with licensed practitioners. 


Some of the medical pictures appear courtesy of the Software Marketing Corporation’s 

Bodyworks 3.0 CD-ROM program. 

Some of the Indian clipart appears courtesy ofPrium Graphics’ KalashKalci 1.0 program 
(617) 444-4103. All Hindi words used in KalashKala vet: 1.0 were created using Saralfonts, a 

product of SaralSoft, located in California. 


Acid-free paper; vegetable-based ink 


Printed in Canada 






The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Table of Contents 


Dedication.vii 

Photo of Atrea.viii 

Poem.ix 

Foreword.xi 

Photos of Himalayas, Ashwins.xii 

Acknowledgments.xiii 

Photos of Ayurvedic doctors and centers.xiv 

Introduction.xv 

SECTION 1: Fundamentals.1 

Chapter 1 Overview.3 

Chapter 2 The Human Universe.13 

SECTION 2: Analysis.37 

Chapter 3 Analyzing Constitutions and Illness.39 

SECTION 3: Therapeutics.65 

Chapter 4 Herbology.67 

Chapter 5 Glossary.113 

Chapter 6 Nutrition.121 

Chapter 7 Pancha Karma.169 

Chapter 8 Aromatherapy.249 

Chapter 9 Hatha Yoga and Pranayama.255 

Chapter 10 Sound Therapy: Mantras, Chakras, 

and Music.313 

Chapter 11 Color and Gems.321 

Chapter 12 External Influences: Fifestyle, 

Seasons, Exercise.331 

Chapter 13 Psychology, Ethics and 

Spiritual Counseling.337 

SECTION 4: Specific Illnesses &Diseases....351 
Chapter 14 Circulatory System.355 


Bleeding 

Anemia 

Heart 

Blood Pressure 
Arteriosclerosis 
Paraplegia 

Chapter 15 Digestive System.363 

Anorexia 

Vomiting 

Diarrhea/Dysentery 

Digestion 

Abdomen 

Jaundice 

Gall Stones 


Dyspepsia 

Indigestion 

Gastroenteritis 

Colic 

Hyperacidity 

Gastritis 

Malabsorption 

Food Allergies & Parasites 

Constipation 

Hemorrhoids 

Obesity 

Candida 

Ulcers 

Toxin (Ama) 

Chapter 16 Infections and Wounds.393 

Fever 

Abscess 

Sinus 

Wounds 

Inflammatory Ulcers 
Fractures/Dislocations 

Chapter 17 Respiratory System.409 

Cough 

Breathing 

Hiccup 

TB 

Cold 

Chapter 18 Urinary System.419 

Urine Prostate 
Diabetes 

Chapter 19 Ear, Nose, Throat, 

Mouth, and Eyes.429 

Ears 

Nose 

Catarrh 

Hoarse Throat 

Eyes 

Mouth 

Chapter 20 Nervous System.457 

Convulsions 

Sciatica 



































The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Insanity 

Epilepsy 

Addictions 

Alcohol Recovery 

Fainting 

Coma 

Wasting 

Multiple Sclerosis 

Parkinsons 

Alzheimers 

Chapter 21 Skin.479 

Warts 

Skin 

Leukoderma 
Herpes Zoster 

Chapter 22 Neoplasm/Abnormal Growths 493 

Scrotum 

Fistula 

Elephantiasis 

Hernia 

Tumors 

Cancer 

Chapter 23 Reproductive System.503 

Females 

Childbirth 

Planets and Newborns 
Males 

Venereal Diseases 

Chapter 24 Immune System.527 

HIV/AIDS 
Epstein Barr 
Fibromyalgia 

Chapter 25 Metabolic System.531 

Edema 

Meningitis 

Quinsy 

Tonsillitis 

Abscesses 


Goiter 

Hyperthyroidism 
Benign Tumors 
Gout 
Thirst 

Chapter 26 Miscellaneous:.541 

Three Vital Organs—Heart, Head, Bladder 

Headaches, Migraines 

Arthritis, Rheumatism 

Dangerous Spiritual Practices 

Herbs for Tissues and Organs 

Gland Definitions 

Organs and Doshas 

When to Take Herbs 

Herbal Recipes 

Mutually Incompatible Foods 

Herb Preparation and Use 

Herb Mixing 

Ayurvedic Acupuncture 

Chapter 27 Outer Healing.557 

Beauty Care 

Jyotish - Vedic Astrology 
Vastu Shastra 
Feng Shui 
Scientific Research 
Ecological-caused disorders 


Appendixes 

Sanskrit Alphabet.586 

Dosha Self-Test.588 

Client Health History Form.590 

Dosha Food Plans.592 

Resources.608 

About the Author.611 

Glossary.613 

Bibliography.624 

Index.627 

End poem.669 






















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Dedication 


Dedicated to my beloved baba, His Holiness 1008, Sri Sri Srimat Swami Narayan Tirthaji 
Maharaj, without whose Divine silence and blessings, this book could never have been written or 

published. 





The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 



Atreya Punarvasu: Author of the Charak Samhita 



J MjdxrLcmljcjCLL § 7 It-IlLIlA- 











The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


A Psalm of Dedication 

(In memory of the Christmas in Montreal, 1952) 
Who are Thou, Magnum Marvel 
Hanging in the cross-bar of cruelty? 

Veneration to Thee! 

Does the soul of Eternal Pathos-Stalled 
in the body of man 
Role Defiance to Death? 

A man never Thou art. 

The petty strip of a loin-cloth 

shies to bring Thy body bare to all eyes 

But is forced to slip off Thy slim waist; 

Thy arms wide apart, 

Thy bellowing feet locked together, 

For Thy palm and Thy soles to get 
Teethed in canine hooks. 

Thy sores drain Thy red hot blood. 

And, what eyes are Thine! 

Wide and Large azure pools, 

Half-lid but flowing 

The tears of mercy sublime 

That roll down Thy sturdy cheeks 

To mix up with Thy blood 

And drench the arid bosom of Earth-with 

the elixir of graceful piety. 

And, here Thou art lofty- alone 
Ignoring ignorance of Soul. 

Thy golden curly locks 
Spray the Spree of love sincere; 

The crown of thorn about Thy head-Meant 
to mean the message of Envy-Beams 
luster of halo to clouds 
As also to gloom and the glum; 

And Thou stickest fast 

As the scare-craft of Sin and the Devil. 

ft ft 

Memory hits at the glimpses old. 

I get to have seen Thee before-sometime 
and somewhere else. 

Pray wait till I may gather up. 

Well perhaps Thou are the One 
That on the beginning of the world 
Cupped Thy palm to hold all the venom 
And drenched Thy throat blue 
To deliver the gods in heaven 


As also all the beings of earth 
Against the puff of poison. 

It is Thine to keep everything 
And every being playing pure-Pure 
in form and in spirit. 

Certainly yes I cognize Thee. 

Thou art Civa the Benevolence. 

\^0 \^0 

And, 

Did I not meet Thee once more yet 
on the foot of a mighty oak 
In the dense of a wood-Land hilly? 
can it be a miss? Oh no. 

These broad and big eyes 
Shedding compassion of love 
For all beings pining in penance 
This pose of unstirring fortitude 
of forbearing Forgiveness, 

This untold agony of loving sacrifice 
These cherry lips inviting 
A thousand kisses of gratitude 
And still tending a resolute vow-All 
these were then and there-in. 

There Thou satest stalled 
To a humble seat of dried stalk, 

As fixed as a doll divine, 

And Thy lips muttering a stout oath— 

I don’t fail to recollect it-This 
sitting be mine Last 
To soak me dry if 

Knowledge unbound fling not its door 
Open unto me and let me find 
The means to free the soul 
out of all coverings and bondage 
Those eyes like the brightest stars 
Glowed in the wild forlorn 
Becoming the go to pilgrims fair. 
Nothing can con nor whiff my ken 
to find in Thee that one indeed-Buddha 
Idol of Love Enlightened 
© © © 

It’s all the grace of Thy blessings 
That my memory blooms to brighten 





The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Thy vision in full splendor of glory. 

I met Thee, to be sure, 

Amidst the havoc of bloody Kuruxetra. 

Hero of all heroes, Thou wert 
In the driver’s box of a chariot-The 
chariot of mighty Arjuna 
Drawn by four stallions white, 

All brave, bold and proud-To 

drive Thy faithful through the killing spree 

To Eternal Security. 

The reins of the shooting chargers 
Were in Thy fists fixed; 

Sanguinity roared and danced 
Before Thy graceful eyes 
But could by no means disturb 
Thy serene, care-free comfort; 

The same unbridled locks 
Dangled in the wind by Thy shoulders; 

The same rosy resolute lips bore 
The assurance of faith unvexed. 

And how much blood Thou hadest 
The selfish monsters to shed to turn 
The yellow sandy breast of Kuruxetra 
Into a wild stretch of a ruddy mud! 

The pangs of the dying ones, 

The tears of widows and mothers, 

The loud roars of enmity 
The deep sighs of the destitute 
And all these violence 
Thou hadst to nook in Thy breast. 

Was that, the task, too much for Thee 
And, is it why Thou shiftest Thyself 
To this far and far distance, 

To ride the cross, and 

To drain Thy noble blood in drops 

In atonement for what Thou hadst to course? 

Thou winst Thy Self 

And dost wean the children of God 

To savour truth, purity and faith. 

Certainly Yes, O Magnum Marvel, 

Thou art He that buggied Arjuna, 

Thy brother and Thy Lamb as well, 

From the foul hell to Proud Paradise 
30 30 30 


Ah! Thy Supreme Holy Excellency! 

Eternal Existence 

Paramount Life-Intelligence-Bliss! 

Amalgam of total Beauty- Harmony- Music! 
Thou art Sole Energy to spring motion forth. 
And Nature is Thy modus operandi. 
Salutations to Thee. 

Blow the blind off the sockets of sight 
And jut Thy revelation 
more solemn and profound. 

I, the most petty and low of Thy Lambs 
Beg to pray for riddance 
From the dismal abyss of falsehood— 
Boastful and selfish Ignorance. 

Holdst me up. 

Heedest my passion’s groan, 

Bathest me in faith divine 
Brashest all scars of violation off 
With Thy breath and Thy glance. 

And foundst in my heart my soul 
Long forgotten to feel. 

Be it Thou pleasure to accept 

- My ovation to Civa in Thee 

- My tributes to Buddha in Thee 

- My homage to Krishna in Thee 
And be it Thy kindness superb 
To turn this dolt in me 
Into a fair forehead Arya, 

The holy and ever 

progressive friar 
To the goal of self- 
immolation- 

Clear, complete and perfect- 
Against the slips of whom 
Fore-and-aft standst Thou 
Ever and for-ever. 


Bhikshu Suddev 

May 20, 1994; Shankar Math 

Uttarkashi, India 








The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Foreword 


I am happy to write these few words by way 
of introduction to, and appreciation of Shri 
Swami Sada Shivaji’s book entitled, The Ayurveda 
Encyclopedia: Taking Control of Your 
Health; Natural Secrets To Healing, Prevention, 
& Longevity for Families and Practitioners. 
Ayurveda is a science of life that deals with 
the problems of longevity, and suggests a safe, 
gentle, and effective way to rid diseases afflicting 
our health. Ayurveda is regarded as the fifth Veda — 
by its virtue—and has been practiced in India for 


thousands of years. Medicinal plants 
and their utility are widely described in the Vedas ; 
especially in Atharva Veda. To understand 
Ayurveda, it is necessary that we should have a 
good knowledge of its basic principals. Swamiji 
has clearly described these basic principals in his 
book, The Ayurveda Encyclopedia. This book 
covers approximately two years worth of study 
at India government-recognized Ayurveda colleges 
and universities. I congratulate Swamiji 
for writing this magnificent work. 

Dr. S.N. Srivastava 
B.A.M.S. (K.U.) 

U.G.T.T. (I.M.S., B.H.U) 

Head of Department, Kayachikitsa 
Government Ayurvedic College 
Gurukul Kangri 
Hardwar, India 





The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 



Ashwin Twins: The Celestial Physicians 



Uttarkashi: Himalayan Mountains and Ganges River 




xn 


cLcrLtk TL 


L.C-CL 











The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Acknowledgments 


Ayurveda has come into my life through 
various teachers. First, studies were through two 
correspondence courses, by Dr. Vasant Lad and Dr. 
David Frawley. They were the first authors in the 
U.S. to present Ayurveda in a simple, thorough, 
and clear manner. Conversations with Dr. Frawley 
showed him to have a generous spirit of one who 
is a living example of Ayurveda. 

Next, I went to India to get a deeper 
understanding and experience from the source. My 
teachers were Dr. R. H. Singh, department head 
of Kayachikitsa, at Benares Hindu University 
(BHU) and Dr. I. R Singh, professor of Ayurveda 
at BHU, who generously shared some of their time 
to personally tutor and allow me to tour the BHU 
Ayurveda clinic with their students. Dr. I.P. Singh 
spent many days privately tutoring me on 
herbology and the spiritual foundations of the 
subject. It was a great blessing to have such 
esteemed teachers share their time, knowledge, and 
experience. 

During my spiritual studies with my Guruji 
in the Himalayan town of Uttarkashi, I met Dr. 
Ram Chandra Uniyal, with whom I have studied 
for many years. He kindly allowed me to sit in on 
his consultations and gain greater practical 
experience of pulse analysis and treatment of 
disease. Dr. Uniyal, a recognized expert on 
Himalayan mountain herbs, took the photographs 
of the herbs in this book and reviewed the book 
for technical accuracy. Without his input on the 
herbal therapies in Section 4, it would have been 
impossible to complete this work. 

Another peer review member, Dr. Satnam 
S. Sandhu, provided several insights on the 
tradition of Ayurveda, as well as some reflections 
in the realm of Western medicine. His assistance, 
technical and otherwise, has been crucial to the 
accuracy and authenticity of this book. 

The third peer review member was Dr. J. 
Kishan Chandhok who has gone through many 
chapters with a fine tooth comb, helping to clarify 
many important points. 


The author of the poem, A Psalm of 
Dedication (page ix), is Swami Suddev Tirtha, my 
elder guru brother, was an extremely learned man, 
yet simple and humble (even at age 92 he was the 
“stand-by” swami to replace the Shankaracharya 
[highest spiritual post in India] should his 
prescence be required). I am honored to accept and 
print his wonderful poem about the universality of 
religion. The underlying theme of this book is the 
universality of Ayurveda as a healing science and 
how it integrates simply with all other forms of 
healing, including modern medicine. Swamiji 
expired several months before the publication of 
this book, and is dearly remembered. 

Dr. Anil Kumar Darji also deserves 
recognition for providing some modern 
explanations for Ayurvedic pathologies, as well as 
some of the herbal energetics in the materia medica. 
Over the years he has taugh me how to address 
many of the more serious health disorders. For 
example we successfully treated non-Hodgkins 
lymphoma along with western drugs - healing a 
condition that has a 50% survival rate. It is this 
deep level of Ayurvedic healing that I hope can be 
introduced in the West. 

Special thanks to the hatha yoga models 
who generously donated their time and talents: Jeff 
Caughey, certified Ayurvedic Practitioner/certified 
hatha yoga instructor; Ray Pesonen, yoga teacher; 
Dr. Baldev Anand, Pahcha karma specialist; and 
Chris Deutsch, yoga student. 

Countless thanks are also due to Guru 
Arnrit Kaur Khalsa and Rob Paton of Caduceus 
Press, who edited this book. They worked above 
and beyond the call of duty, taking a personal 
interest in this project. 

Also, I am grateful to my clients - true 
teachers - from whom I learnd great lessons. 

Finally, I am most grateful to my Guruji, 
His Holiness 1008 Sri Sri Srimat Swami Narayan 
Tirthaji Maharaj, without whose blessings and 
grace this task could never have been achieved. 





The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 



Certification student practicing herb mixing 
Ayurveda Holistic Center, Bayville, NY, USA 


Dr. Satnam Sandhu 



Two Ayurveda Holistic Center branches in Uttarkashi (Himalayas), India 



Dr. Ram Chandra Uniyal taking patient’s pulse 
at the Uttarkashi center 


xiv 


Gurukul Kangri; Hardwar India 
Ayurveda Government College 













The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Introduction 

The knowledge of Ayurveda was handed down from Brahma to Daksha Prajdpati, onto the 
Ashwin twins (the divine doctors), then passed to Indr a. Sage Bharadvbja volunteered to go to 
heaven to receive this wisdom from Indra, and so became the first human to receive the 
knowledge of Ayurveda. He passed it to Atreya, then onto Punarnavasu and finally Agnivesha. 


This book was written at the request of my students, 
who sought a deeper understanding of the 
Ayurvedic process. To that end I have endeavored 
to provide the following: deeper insight into the 
spiritual foundation of Ayurveda; and the cause 
and unfoldment of disease; photographs of the 
Ayurvedic herbs; a more comprehensive materia 
medica; diacritical marks to facilitate 
pronunciation of Sanskrit (Ayurvedic language) 
words; an expanded presentation of Ayurvedic 
hatha yoga and prdndyama with photographs; an 
expanded pahcha karma chapter; a discussion of 
current research on many of the Ayurvedic herbs; 
a discussion of the complimentary relationship 
between Western and Ayurvedic methods; and 
discussions based not only on traditional Ayurvedic 
thought, but also on the practical results of my 
experiences and those of other Ayurvedic doctors 
and practitioners. 

To achieve these ends, the ancient Ayurvedic 
texts were consulted along with books by 
contemporary authors. The purpose was to 
synthesize ancient tradition with modern use. 
Authentic Vedic spiritual books have also been 
researched to better incorporate the spiritual 
dimension of Ayurveda. 

An attempt has been made to present the 
material in a simple and instructive manner, 
accessible even to those with little prior knowledge 
of Ayurveda. It is also hoped it will help unite 
Western and Ayurvedic traditions. 

This book is composed of four sections: 

1. Ayurvedic Theory/Fundamentals 

2. Constitution (Dosha) and Illness Diagnosis 


3. Therapeutic Modalities 

4. Specific Illnesses and Diseases (Diagnosis, 
pathology, and therapies) 

Through this 5th printing, the book has found a 
home with families, medical professionals, 
university courses and research departments. 

Since I began practicing Ayurveda in 1988, 
Ayurveda’s popularity has grown. It is important 
to maintain its spiritual, intuitive integrity, trying 
not to force-fit it into the Western medical paradigm 
or chasing after ‘acceptance’ by Western medicine. 

Ayurveda is first and foremost a ‘spiritual 
science’ - offering scientific insights how live in 
harmony with nature and to grow toward the 
realization of one’s true nature or Soul. Medicine 
is only one aspect of this science of compassion. 

It is a science that must be lived as it is taught. 
It is not enough to say, ‘do as I say’. The best 
practitioner is one who is becoming more in 
harmony with their Soul and thus can lovingly 
teach how to heal by inspirational example. 

Let us focus on using Ayurveda to help the 
needy help themselves in terms of spiritual, 
physical, mental, and ecological health, organic 
farming, and social equality. Let us share Ayurveda 
more from love and less for fame and fortune. 
Thereby, we can grow a truly healthy, peacful 
world. 

As with all areas of life, dear readers, you will 
succeed by following common sense, practicality, 
and intuition. For it is a love of life - of God (or 
spirit, nature, or ethics) that is the best medicine 
and also the goal of life. 

Wishing you all health and peace. 


This book is offered in devotional service. It is my hope that it will be read with devotion; 
knowledge without devotion is like driving a car without oil, 
or like growing a beautiful flower without a scent. 

Bayville, NY, USA 
December, 2005 





The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 




J MjdxrLcmljcjCLL W+LiLthS- 





Section 1: Fundamentals 


Chapter 1: Overview 


Section 1 

Ayurvedic Fundamentals 








The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 



fi\ 


1 Mjdxrlxm lc ja J . 
























































































Section 1: Fundamentals 


Chapter 1: Overview 


Like an oasis is a mirage of the desert, 
this world is an illusion of Brahman. 

Upanishadic wisdom 


Chapter 1 

Overview of Ayurveda 


/si yurveda, the “science of life,” or longevity, 
w* is the holistic alternative science from In¬ 
dia, and is more than 5,000 years old. It 
is believed to be the oldest healing science in ex¬ 
istence, forming the foundation of all others. Bud¬ 
dhism, Taoism, Tibetan, and other cultural medi¬ 
cines have many similar parallels to Ayurveda. The 
secret of Ayurveda’s individualized healing method 
was preserved in India, whereas it has been lost or 
superseded in other cultures. 

The First World Medicine 

Ayurveda (pronounced Aa-yer-vay-da), said to 
be a world medicine, is the most holistic or com¬ 
prehensive medical system available. Before the 
arrival of writing, the ancient wisdom of healing, 
prevention, and longevity was a part of the spiri¬ 
tual tradition of a universal religion. Healers gath¬ 
ered from the world over, bringing their medical 
knowledge to India. Veda Vyasa, the famous sage, 
preserved the complete knowledge of Ayurveda 
in writing, along with the more spiritual insights 
of ethics, virtue, and Self-Realization. Others say 
Ayurveda was passed down from God to his an¬ 
gels, and finally to humans. 

The methods used to find this knowledge of 
herbs, foods, aromas, gems, colors, yoga, mantras, 
lifestyle, and surgery are fascinating and varied. 
The sage, physicians/surgeons of the time were the 
same sages or seers, deeply devoted holy people, 
who saw health as an integral part of spiritual life. 
It is said that they received their training of 
Ayurveda through direct cognition during medita¬ 
tion. That is, the knowledge of the use of the vari¬ 
ous methods of healing, prevention, longevity, and 


surgery came through Divine revelation; guessing 
or animal testing was unnecessary. These revela¬ 
tions were transcribed from oral tradition into writ¬ 
ten form, interspersed with aspects of mortal life 
and spirituality. 

Originally four main books of Vedic spiritual¬ 
ity existed. Topics included health, astrology, spiri¬ 
tual business, government, military, poetry, and 
ethical living. These are known as the Vedas: Rik, 
Santa, Yajur, and Atharva. Ayurveda was used 
along with Vedic astrology (called Jyotish, that is, 
one’s “inner light”). Eventually, Ayurveda was 
organized into its own compact system of health 
and considered a branch of Atharva Veda. This 
upavedaAsranch dealt with the healing aspects of 
spirituality; although, it did not directly treat spiri¬ 
tual development. Passages related to Ayurveda 
from the various Vedas were combined into sepa¬ 
rate books dealing only with Ayurveda. Among 
the Rik Veda’s 10,572 hymns are discussions of 
the three constitutions ( doshas): air (Vayu), fire 
(Pitta), and water (Kapha). Topics comprised or¬ 
gan transplants, artificial limbs, and the use of herbs 
to heal diseases of the mind and body and to foster 
longevity. Within the Atharva Veda’s 5,977 hymns 
are discussions of anatomy, physiology, and sur¬ 
gery. 

There were two schools of Ayurveda at the time 
of Atreya, the school of physicians and the school 
of surgeons. These two schools transformed 
Ayurveda into a scientifically verifiable and clas¬ 
sifiable medical system. Through research and test¬ 
ing, they dispelled the doubts of the more practi¬ 
cal and scientific minded, removing the aura of 
mystery that surrounded Divine 





History of Ayurveda 


The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


<D 


c3 

B 

J3 

a 

U 

PQ 


c3 

Dh 

PLh ' 

c3 

Q 


c3 

a 


£ 

-C 

c/> 

< 


C/5 

ctf 


C/5 

X! 

Oh 

13 

• rH 

C/5 

in 

O 



"O 

O 

> 


(Treta Yuga) - (develops school 
of surgery - 9-6th century BC) 









Section 1: Fundamentals 


Chapter 1: Overview 


0 

c/3 

cd 

> 

H 

cd 

c 

PLh 

cd 

D 

5—i 

4—> 

'< 


<4H U 

° m 

8 &■ 

d9 S 

^ <D 
c/3 O 

o •= 

CJ ^ 

iS oo 


> 

<D 

73 

cd 


C/3 


&.S 

o 


94 

cd 

Q 

< 

c3 


d2 

u 

^H 

4—» 

id 

GO 

<D 

(D 

<D 

• i-H 

S-h 

£ 

> ' 

CO 

cd 

1 


icd 

<D 

s-i 

• rH 


<D 

S-H 


4—> C/3 

'S-S 1 

Oh 


, dd 

'< S’ 

cd 

00 


§ Q 

s <c 

■rt 9 

^ =5 

•j—I 

±j- rt 

he <d 

.o. 

cd 

W) S 
icd 00 
icd sd 
±d- <D 

•S-f 

< > 


cd 

c5 ^ 

■a 9 

icd ^ 

11 

^ dd 


"cd <* 

r ^, C/3 


C/3 

O 

sd 

W) 

cd 


cd 

£ 

4d ^ 

*2 sd 
icd o 


m 


Q 

< 

led >> 

*2 3 
•s s 

H* <D 
§ ° 
CO £ 

ed 

5-h 

ed 
"-C 
73 
ed 
OD 
•?d 
ed 

S-H 

led 

dd 

'CO 


C/3 ■ 

<D 

D. 

• l-H 

o 

<D 

5-h 


73 

CD 

> 

5-h 

3 

'< 


Q 

< 

5-h 
■4—> 

id 

CD 

O 

dd 

4—> 

^t 


73 

(D 

C/3 

=S 

4— > 
C/3 

5- h 


S-H 

d 

o 

u 

(D 


u 

PQ 

icd ^ 
4—> 

— 1 5—i 

=3 


• 

dd 

dd £• c 

g cd <d 

b to o 

c/3* td 9d 

r-( 2 4-» 

i- 3 S-h UO 

co -3 ■ 


co £ ■ 

C/3- XT 

3 £3 

^ s 

N *— ^ 4_> 


£ 


BhavaprakaSha - by BhavamiShra 
(Classifications -16th century AD) 












The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


revelation. Consequently, Ayurveda grew in respect 
and became a widely used system of healing in 
India. People from many countries came to Indian 
Ayurvedic schools to leam about this medicine in 
its entirety. Chinese, Tibetans, Greeks, Romans, 
Egyptians, Afghanis, Persians, and others traveled 
to absorb the wisdom and bring it back to their 
own countries. India’s Silk Road, an established 
trade route between Asia (China, Tibet, etc.), the 
Middle East (Afghanistan, Persia, etc.), and Eu¬ 
rope (Rome, Greece, etc.), provided a link between 
cultures. On this route travelers first discovered 
Ayurveda. 

Charak and Sushrut are two reorganizers of 
Ayurveda whose works are still extant. The third 
major treatise is called the Ashtanga Hridayam, a 
concise version of the works of Charak and 
Sushrut. Thus, the three main ancient Ayurvedic 
texts still in use are the Charak Samhitd (compila¬ 
tion), Sushrut Samhitd, and the Ashtanga Hridayam 
Samhitd. These books are believed to be over 
1,200 years old and contain the original and com¬ 
plete knowledge of this Ayurvedic world medi¬ 
cine. Consequently, Ayurveda is the only com¬ 
plete ancient medical system in existence. 

Charak represents the Atreya school of physi¬ 
cians, discussing physiology, anatomy, etiology, 
pathogenesis, symptoms and signs of disease, 
methodology of diagnosis, treatment and prescrip¬ 
tion for patients, prevention, and longevity. Inter¬ 
nal and external causes of illness are also consid¬ 
ered. Charak maintains that the first cause of ill¬ 
ness is the loss of faith in the Divine. In other words, 
when people do not recognize that God dwells 
within all things, including themselves, this sepa¬ 
ration of vision creates a gap. This gap causes a 
longing or suffering for oneness of vision. This 
suffering then manifests itself as the beginning of 
spiritual, mental, and physical disease. External 
influences on health include time of day, the sea¬ 
sons, diet, and lifestyle. An entire section is de¬ 
voted to discussions of the medicinal aspects of 
herbs, diet, and reversal of aging. 

Sushruta comes from the Dhanvantari school 
of surgeons. In America, a society of surgeons 
named themselves the Sushruta Society in remem¬ 
brance of the Ayurvedic father of surgery. This text 

& 


presents sophisticated accounts of surgical equip¬ 
ment, classification of abscesses, burns, fractures, 
and wounds, amputation, plastic surgery, and anal/ 
rectal surgery. Human anatomy is described in 
great detail, including descriptions of the bones, 
joints, nerves, heart, blood vessels, circulatory sys¬ 
tem, etc., again, corroborated by today’s methods 
of mechanical investigation. From the Sushrut 
Samhitd, the first science of massage is described 
using manna points or vital body points, later 
adapted into Chinese acupuncture. Even the popu¬ 
lar Polarity Massage Therapy in America was de¬ 
veloped after advocates studied massage in India. 

Eight Branches of Ayurveda 

The ancient Ayurvedic system was astound- 
ingly complete. In the colleges of ancient India, 
students could choose a specialty from eight 
branches of medicine. 


1. Internal Medicine (Kdyachikitsd) . 

This is related to the soul, mind, and 
body. Psychosomatic theory recog¬ 
nizes that the mind can create illness in the body 
and vice versa. The seven body constitutions and 
seven mental constitutions were delineated here: 
Vayu (air/energy), Pitta (fire), Kapha (water), 
Vayu/Pitta, Vayu/Kapha, Pitta/ Kapha, and a com¬ 
bination of all three (tridosha). Although finding 
the cause of an illness is still a mystery to modern 
science, it was the main goal of Ayurveda. Six 
stages of the development of disease were known, 
including aggravation, accumulation, overflow, 
relocation, a buildup in a new site, and manifesta¬ 
tion into a recognizable disease. Modem equip¬ 
ment and diagnosis can only detect a disease dur¬ 
ing the fifth and sixth stages of illness. Ayurvedic 
physicians can recognize an illness in the making 
before it creates more serious imbalance in the 
body. Health is seen as a balance of the biological 
humors, whereas disease is an imbalance of the 
humors. Ayurveda creates balance by supplying 
deficient humors and reducing the excess ones. 
Surgery is seen as a last resort. Modern medicine 
is just beginning to realize the need to supply rather 









Section 1: Fundamentals 


Chapter 1: Overview 


than to remove, but still does not know how or what 
to supply. 

Additionally, there are over 2,000 medicinal 
plants classified in India’s materia medica. A 
unique therapy, known as panclm karma (five ac¬ 
tions), completely removes toxins from the body. 
This method reverses the disease path from its 
manifestation stage, back into the blood stream, 
and eventually into the gastrointestinal tract (the 
original site of the disease). It is achieved through 
special diets, oil massage, and steam therapy. At 
the completion of these therapies, special forms 
of emesis, purgation, and enema remove excesses 
from their sites of origin. Finally, Ayurveda reju- 
venates-rebuilding the body’s cells and tissues af¬ 
ter toxins are removed. 


ment of intestinal obstructions, bladder stones, and 
the use of dead bodies for dissection and learning 
were taught and practiced. 

W - 6. Psychiatry (Bhuta Vidya) . A whole 
■ branch of Ayurveda specifically deals 
with diseases of the mind (including de¬ 
monic possession). Besides herbs and diet, yogic 
therapies (breathing, mantras, etc.) are employed. 

7. Aphrodisiacs (Vdjikarana) . This sec¬ 
tion deals with two aspects: infertility (for 
those hoping to conceive) and spiritual de¬ 
velopment (for those eager to transmute sexual en¬ 
ergy into spiritual energy). 




2. Ears. Nose, and Throat 

(Shalakva Tantra) . 

Sushruta reveals approximately 72 eye 
diseases, surgical procedures for all eye disorders 
(e.g., cataracts, eyelid diseases), and for diseases 
of the ears, nose, and throat. 



8. Rejuvenation (Rasdyana) . 
Prevention and longevity are discussed 
in this branch of Ayurveda. Charak says 
that in order to develop longevity, ethics and vir¬ 
tuous living must be embraced. 


3. Toxicology 

(Vishagara-vairodh Tantra) . 

Topics include air and water pollution, tox¬ 
ins in animals, minerals, vegetables, and epidem¬ 
ics; as well as keys for recognizing these anoma¬ 
lies and their antidotes. 

■A 4. Pediatrics (Kaumdra bhritya) . 

A, In this branch prenatal and postnatal care 
of the baby and mother are discussed. Top¬ 
ics include methods of conception; choosing the 
child’s gender, intelligence, and constitution; and 
childhood diseases and midwifery. 

5. Surgery (Shalya Tantra ) . More 
than 2,000 years ago, sophisticated 
methods of surgery were known. This 
information spread to Egypt, Greece, Rome, and 
eventually throughout the world. In China, treat- 

& 


The Decline of Ayurveda 

The alert person may now ask why, if Ayurveda 
is so exceptional, is it not widely practiced in In¬ 
dia today. This is a valid question, which has an 
equally valid answer. Ayurveda, like all of Vedic 
philosophy, adheres to the belief in Sanatana 
dharma, or accepting everything in its appropriate 
time and place, and rejecting nothing. All aspects 
of medicine may be useful, but the appropriate 
treatment must be used when required. This is why 
Ayurveda does not reject modern medicine. The 
Indian temperament allows all religions to express 
themselves freely in India. Buddhism, Jainism, and 
other religions grew in India and influenced the 
thinking of many people. Eventually, a time came 
when all religions lost some degree of their spiri¬ 
tual link, and egos vied for first place. Gentle spiri¬ 
tual medicine lost ground. Divisiveness was fol¬ 
lowed by foreign conquest. Ayurvedic colleges 

Xk 
















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


were closed and books destroyed. One nation 
forced Ayurvedic doctors to add information on 
meat to the translations of the Ayurvedic texts. 

Another religion did not believe in harming the 
body in any manner and destroyed the books on 
Ayurvedic surgery. Nalanda, at Patna, India, a fa¬ 
mous Ayurvedic university, was the main univer¬ 
sity at the center of the Silk Road, where students 
from China, Tibet, the Middle East, and Europe 
came to study. This institution was among those 
destroyed by various conquerors. During the nine¬ 
teenth and early twentieth centuries, the British 
ruled India and closed the remaining Ayurvedic 
universities (although Ayurveda continued to be 
practiced in secret). The knowledge was preserved 
by the guru-shishya relationship (teacher-student) 
and passed from one generation to the next by word 
of mouth as it had centuries before. Finally, in 1920 
Ayurveda reemerged and, with the help of the In¬ 
dian government’s assistance, universities were 
rebuilt. Now more than 150 Ayurvedic universi¬ 
ties and 100 Ayurvedic colleges are flourishing in 
India, with plans for more educational facilities in 
development. Thus, Ayurveda, without resisting 
or rejecting other systems, is slowly returning to 
recognition and reestablishing its true value. Keep 
in mind that just as some unethical western medi¬ 
cal practices exist; unethical Ayurvedic pharma¬ 
cies and doctors can also be found in India today. 

The oldest medicine, Ayurveda, is now the last 
to be rediscovered. This world medicine may not 
only unite healing practices, but also peoples, cul¬ 
tures, and religions. The impact of its re-awaken¬ 
ing is astounding, as we see its effectiveness and 
demand in the United States growing in leaps and 
bounds. Among the respected teachers of 
Ayurveda, many include the original spiritual in¬ 
tegration, reestablishing ancient Ayurveda, intact 
in modem society. Spiritual Ayurveda, the origi¬ 
nal world medicine, will soon find validation and 
universal acceptance in all areas of society and the 
world. 

What may surprise some people is the degree 
of insight these ancient, mystical doctors, or rishis 
(seers) had. Without the aid of modern technologi¬ 
cal x-ray machines or CT-scans, they knew of the 
inner workings of the human body. One can read 


in the ancient Ayurvedic texts of the development 
of the fetus, month by month. It is astonishing how 
these ancient descriptions are validated by today’s 
technologies. Even the distance from the planets 
and the duration of their orbits were nearly identi¬ 
cal to today’s technological measurements. It is 
enough to make even the most skeptical of us sit 
up and consider Ayurvedic insights. 

So we see the foundation for the integration of 
Ayurveda and modem medicine. Too many people 
on both sides of the holistic-vs-allopathic (mod¬ 
em) medicine debate want to deny the need for the 
other science. Because of Ayurveda’s all-embrac¬ 
ing philosophy, we see how all types of healing 
are compatible. No one will be put out of a job. 


Spiritual Ayurveda 

We have discussed Ayurveda, 
he “science of life” as the original 
world medicine. Yet Ayurveda is more than this; it 
is a spiritual science. This is the most important 
aspect of Ayurveda. 

Around 1500 B.C. the book, the Charak 
Samhitd discussed these spiritual principles. It said 
that even if Ayurvedic doctors had a complete 
knowledge of Ayurveda but could not reach the 
inner Self or soul of the patient, they would not be 
effective healers. Furthermore, if the practitioner 
were more concerned with fame and fortune, and 
not with spiritual development (Self-Realization), 
they would not be effective healers. 

To understand the spiritual nature of Ayurveda, 
we must know something about the Vedic roots of 
philosophy, spirituality, and universal religion. 
According to the ancient Vedic scriptures of India 
there is a goal to life. We are not simply born, to 
live, and then to die without some meaning or pur¬ 
pose. Albert Einstein reflected this idea when he 
said God does not play dice with the universe. Or¬ 
der and reason exist in life. According to Vedic 
philosophy life is Divine and the goal of life is to 
realize our inner Divine nature. Ayurvedically 
speaking the more a person realizes their Divine 
nature the healthier they are. Thus it is the respon- 








Section 1: Fundamentals 


Chapter 1: Overview 


sibility of the Ayurvedic doctor to inspire or help 
awaken the patients to their own inner Divine na¬ 
ture. Positive thinking or love is the best medicine. 
When patients are taught they have this Divinity 
within themselves, they feel a connection to life 
and God (however each patient defines God). For 
atheists, we speak of the greater mystical power, 
which is synonymous to God. This connection al¬ 
lows patients to feel they have a handle on life and 
an ability to develop their own inner nature. After 
this, secondary therapies of herbs, diet, meditation, 
etc. are offered. 

Even modern medical doctors are finding a link 
between their healthy patients and the patient’s 
degree of spiritual faith. Spirituality changes the 
definition of health, giving it an added dimension. 
Two types of health can now be seen diagnosed 
health and true health. Often when a patient is di¬ 
agnosed as healthy, they still may not feel healthy 
or alive. This is due to psychosomatic conditions 
where a troubled mind affects the health of the 
body. The deepest level of mental agitation is the 
longing for a deeper spiritual connection. 

Ayurveda suggests true health is based on the 
healthy functioning of four areas of life; physical/ 
mental health, career or life purpose, spiritual re¬ 
lationships, and spirituality. First one needs to be 
physically and mentally able to do work and play. 
Then persons need to work to support themselves 
and afford a social life. Work however is defined 
as making a living doing something meaningful 
or purposeful. To do this type of work one needs 
to use their innate or God-given talents; they need 
to work at something they love to do. It is this love 
that cultures spirituality. 

All too often we find people working at jobs 
that they dislike. Often people are forced into a 
“practical” career by parents or societal beliefs. 
Other persons lack the self-worth and confidence 
to challenge themselves to find and live their 
dreams. Working in meaningless, unfulfilling jobs 
can create mental and physical disorders. 

The most extreme example of illness caused by 
lack of purpose is cancer. Ayurveda considers can¬ 
cer an emotionally caused disease. By not having 
a purpose in life (i.e., suppressing life) people cre¬ 
ate life within their body—cancer. When seriously 

& 


ill people discuss what they would love to do (in¬ 
stead of what they are told to do) life returns to 
their eyes. As they begin to follow up on these 
ideas, some remarkable recoveries are seen. Pur¬ 
poseful career is then an aspect of this new defini¬ 
tion of health. 

The third realm of health is spiritual relation¬ 
ships. When persons are healthy and purposefully 
working, they can now begin to truly enjoy their 
social life. These days we have become acutely 
aware of the emotional and physical abuses that 
exist in many people’s relationships. Co-depen¬ 
dency and enabling are often used terms to describe 
relationship diseases. From the spiritual standpoint 
if one is dependent on anything other than God, 
co-dependency exists. People look for something 
lasting or permanent; only God is eternal and ev¬ 
erlasting. Spiritual development directs one to fo¬ 
cus inwardly to discover their eternal nature in¬ 
stead of the ever-changing outer realm of life. For 
relationships to be healthy all people must con¬ 
tinue to develop their individual inner spiritual 
lives. Then they are able to share their growing 
spiritual fullness with their spouse and others. 

Too often individuals are attracted to one an¬ 
other because they see a quality that they think they 
do not have. In reality each person has all the hu¬ 
man qualities within themselves because inner eter¬ 
nal Divinity, by definition, contains everything. 
Further, if one can see a quality in another they 
must have it within themselves in order to recog¬ 
nize it. When the main focus in people’s lives is 
the Divine, then troubles that seemed like moun¬ 
tains are seen as molehills. Thus the third dimen¬ 
sion of health involves healthy spiritual relation¬ 
ships. 

Once people are sound in body and mind, work in 
a purposeful career and have fulfilling spiritual 
relationships, life develops a state of grace. People 
then become eager to devote more time to spiri¬ 
tual development, the final dimension of health. 
Personal spiritual development is seen on many 
levels. The body becomes more relaxed, the mind 
more calm and alert; and one becomes more per¬ 
sonable in relationships. Yet the most profound 
developments take place inwardly; Divinity grows 

Xk 





The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


within. Gradually one also begins to see the Di¬ 
vinity in others and all of life. 

This is the multi-dimensional definition of 
health according to Ayurveda. Life is composed 
of many elements; it is not seen as independent 
parts. If one aspect of life becomes imbalanced all 
the other aspects are affected. Rather than merely 
treating a symptom, Ayurveda looks to the root 
cause or underlying reasons of illness. The body 
may be sick because of mental or career stress. 
Rather than instruct the patient to merely take a 
drug or an herb to heal the physical condition, the 
practitioner of Ayurvedic medicine looks to restore 
balance within the patient (e.g., calming the mind 
or finding a more purposeful job). The deepest root 
level is spiritual development. Thus, all four areas 
of life must be cultivated; mind/body, career, spiri¬ 
tual relationships, and inner spiritual development. 



The Development of 
Allopathic Medicine 

Not long ago in America herbal and naturo¬ 
pathic medicines were the common healing mo¬ 
dalities. Grandmothers and mothers gave family 
members natural or herbal remedies when they 
were sick. 

Parallel to the onset of the industrial revolution, 
rose allopathic medicine—not because it was bet¬ 
ter, but because more money was available for its 
propagation. A chief developer of allopathic medi¬ 
cine was Andrew Carnegie, who saw a better fi¬ 
nancial future for himself in investing large sums 
of money to develop allopathic research and diag¬ 
nostic machinery instead of encouraging natural 
medicine research. Thus allopathy had the back¬ 
ing to develop and surpass natural medicine. 

This statement is not meant to discredit the ef¬ 
fectiveness and usefulness of modern medicine, but 
merely intended to underline the point that herbal 
medicine was also an effective healing method, but 
it was swept under the rug in the name of progress 
and was viewed less enthusiastically. Now, due to 
difficult economic times, the high cost of medical 
care, and hazardous side effects from drugs, people 
have been forced to return to alternative measures 


for relief. As with any groundswell at the 
grassroots, when something works the word gets 
out. People are returning to alternative or compli¬ 
mentary healthcare in droves. 


Self-Healing & Self-Realization 

The main theme of Ayurveda is that people can 
adequately educate themselves to take control of 
their own health. This is achieved by monitoring 
and balancing one’s nutritional and lifestyle hab¬ 
its to heal, prevent illness, and develop longevity. 
Ayurveda teaches that people are their own best 
healers. One’s intuition is better at discerning subtle 
health imbalances than relying on another person. 
All that is needed is some basic guidelines offered 
by the Ayurvedic practitioner. 

The ability to take control of one’s health in¬ 
spires self-worth and self-empowerment. Faith in 
one’s intuitive abilities is further engendered when 
persons actually see the positive results from their 
efforts. Realizing one has the ability to take con¬ 
trol of one’s own health is itself a key factor in 
healing. 

Self-reliance is also the most important com¬ 
ponent in spiritual development. Individuals can 
learn to rely on their own intuition [along with 
guidelines laid out by one’s spiritual mentor or guru 
and from the scriptures]. As one begins to see posi¬ 
tive results developing in their spiritual life, doubts 
begin to vanish: clarity, confidence, and mental 
peace begin to dawn. 

The mental peace of Self-Realization is said to 
be the true state of life because it is eternal, non¬ 
changing. Vedic shastras (scriptures) speak of the 
three legs of truth; what the scriptures say, what 
the guru or spiritual guide says, and what one ex¬ 
periences for oneself. Only when all three sources 
are found to be saying the same thing is something 
accepted as truth. But it is personal experience that 
must also be known; it is not enough to follow 
something dogmatically with blind faith. 

Doubts are mental agitation. When doubts are 
dispelled the mind gains a state of peace. In Self- 
Realization one knows truth in its eternal nature; 
they cannot be swayed or agitated. The first step 






Section 1: Fundamentals 


Chapter 1: Overview 


towards Self-Realization is developing the 
ability to not be swayed by others if you experi¬ 
ence things differently. The American poet 
Thoreau, after reading the Vedic scriptures, 
expressed it this way: 

If a man cannot keep pace with his 
companions, 

perhaps it is because he hears the beat 
of a different drummer. 

Let him step to the beat he hears, 
no matter how measured or far away. 

The Ayurvedic practitioner instills this 
philosophy in the patient, who then experiences 
and respects inner intuition and Divinity. When 
patients see that the practitioner believes they have 
such Divine qualities, they usually respond in kind. 

A psychological study highlights the value of 
expectation. Two teachers were given classes of 
students with average abilities. One teacher was 


told their class was above average while the other 
teacher was told they had an average class. The 
first teacher went to class expecting exceptional 
work from the students and treated them accord¬ 
ingly. The other teacher just taught the average 
curriculum. The supposed above average class per¬ 
formed above average. Thus, when the Ayurvedic 
practitioner treats patients with respect, recogniz¬ 
ing their inner intuitive abilities, the patients auto¬ 
matically develop a greater sense of self-worth and 
faith that they can take control of their health. 

As self-worth develops, people are not as eas¬ 
ily swayed by peer pressure, whether pressed to 
take drugs or lead an unethical life. Low self-es¬ 
teem causes people to abuse themselves. Having 
someone recognize one’s inner Divinity and self- 
healing abilities develops confidence. Experienc¬ 
ing positive results from self-healing and spiritual 
development further generates confidence, health, 
mental peace, and Divinity. 





The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 



fih 


1 Mjdxrlxm lc ja J . 





Section 1: Fundamentals 


Chapter 2: The Human Universe 


A plate, a cup, and a bowl are all made from the same clay. 
Like this, all creation is made from the same eternal Brahman. 

Upanishadic wisdom 


Chapter 2 

The Human Universe 


he Vedic scriptures say that there is an 
inextricable link between humans and the 
universe. The very elements of human life 
exist outside in the cosmos as well. As the poet 
Walt Whitman said, “I believe a blade of grass is 
no less than the journey-work of the stars.” In or¬ 
der to understand the universe and environmental 
situations, and to understand human health con¬ 
cerns, one needs to appreciate the common link 
between them: the elements of creation. 

The Vedas discuss the process of creation. First, 
there was the eternal, Divine, unmanifest existence: 
ever present. It is said that life was created from 
within the eternal, like a thread that comes from 
within a spider to be woven into a web. Creation 
eventually dissolves back into the eternal like the 
spider returning the web into itself. 

One may ask how the nonmoving eternal can 
appear to move or create something. Here, the Vedic 
literature, known as the Upanishads , offers a meta¬ 
phor: Just as the desert appears to create an oasis 
without moving to create it, so does the nonmoving 
eternity appear to produce this illusory creation. 
The creation is called illusory because it is not last¬ 
ing; only eternity is real because it is everlasting. 

There is not enough space in this book to justly 
discuss this topic. This is a mere offering into the 
insight of the origin of creation as explained by 
the ancient Vedic rishis (seers). 

As creation developed, it formed three under¬ 
lying principles that uphold all life: the laws of 
creation, maintenance, and dissolution. Everything 
in life is born or created, it lives, and then it dies. 
These principles are known as sattwa, rajas, and 
tamas, respectfully, and are called the three gunas 

dr 


or tendencies. All of life, human and celestial, obey 
these laws. 


The Elements: Building Blocks of Life 

The creation principle developed five essential 
elements—or building blocks that all life forms 
contain: ether, air, fire, water, and earth. We can 
easily see how life was created from the subtlest 
to the grossest matter. From eternity, the subtlest 
form of matter is ether. Ether mixing with eternity 
creates air, a more observable or experiential ele¬ 
ment. As air moves, it eventually creates friction, 
which creates heat or fire. Heat produces mois¬ 
ture, thus creating water, the densest element yet: 
if one tries to walk through water, one is slowed 
by its density. Finally, water produces the densest 
form of matter, earth. The Vedas say that all of the 
creation, including humans, is made up of combi¬ 
nations of all five essential elements. These ele¬ 
ments are the subtlest aspects of human life, finer 
than the molecular, atomic, or subatomic levels. 

This is the level that Ayurvedic healing works 
on. Focusing on the cause of the grosser levels of 
life, the denser aspects will be taken care of since 
they are made up of these five elements. Just as a 
strong foundation supports a strong building, when 
the five elements (the foundation of all matter) are 
strong and balanced in a person, they will auto¬ 
matically balance the more material levels. 

Thus, Ayurveda does not need to look at iso¬ 
lated parts of the human anatomy, or at the vita¬ 
min, chemical, or nutritional level of health. It sim¬ 
ply balances the elements, and this balances the 
more physical levels. 






The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


A person diagnosed with a duodenal ulcer is an 
example of this balancing. Rather than create a 
name for a symptom, Ayurveda identifies the ill¬ 
ness as an excess of the fire element. Acid is a by¬ 
product of heat. Ayurveda will look to see in what 
part of the patient’s life overheating occurs. It may 
be due to eating excessive fiery foods and spices 
like tomatoes and peppers. One’s career may be 
causing undue anger (i.e., hot temper). Perhaps the 
person drinks alcohol (firewater). 

Once the cause is learned, suggestions for re¬ 
ducing a person’s excessive intake of fire are dis¬ 
cussed. Simultaneously, the patient is advised to 
use more of the air and water elements to balance 
the heat with coolness (air cools heat, water puts 
out the fire). Thus, the holistic approach of 
Ayurveda seeks the cause of an illness and restores 
balance, using the insight of the elemental creation 
of the universe. 

The Ayurvedic Body 

Personalizing the healing process is a unique¬ 
ness that Ayurveda brings to the holistic field of 
health. From the insights of the Vedic sages, we 
learn that people are different and need to be indi¬ 
vidually treated. 

Expanding upon this elemental view, the 
Ayurvedic practitioner understands that people are 
made up of various combinations of the elements. 
Some people have more air in their system; some 
people have a more fiery constitution. Others are 
predominantly made up of water. Still others are 
combinations of fire and air, fire and water, or air 
and water. Some people have an equal amount of 
all three elements (ether is combined in air and 
earth within water). 

Thus a more air-predominant individual needs 
to take in less air and more fire and water. A water 
person already has an excess of water, so there is a 
need to reduce the intake of water and to increase 
the fire and air elements in the diet and lifestyle. 

Personalized Healing 

The general Ayurvedic approach is threefold. 

1. Determining one’s elemental constitution ( dosha 
or prakriti ), 


2. Learning the elemental cause of illness iyikriti), 
and 

3. Applying therapeutic recommendations to bal¬ 
ance elements causing the illness, without caus¬ 
ing an imbalance to the dosha (constitution). 

This unique, personalized approach not only 
makes healing effective, but gentle as well. Other 
holistic measures may work, yet still aggravate the 
person’s dosha. Ayurveda is the only holistic sci¬ 
ence that needn’t warn people that they may feel 
worse while the diseases or toxins are being re¬ 
moved before they will feel better. Because of its 
balancing approach, gentleness marks the entire 
healing process. 

Qualities of the Three Doshas 

Parallel to the three gunas ( sattwa, rajas, and 
tamas) in creation are the three doshas, or consti¬ 
tutions, in the human body: Vayu (or Vata), Pitta, 
and Kapha. Vayu may be understood as nerve 
force, electro-motor, physical activity or that, 
which is responsible for motion. It is commonly 
called air. The root, ‘va’ means to spread. In West¬ 
ern terms, it is the electricity setting the organism 
into motion, maintaining the equilibrium between 
Pitta and Kapha (inerts). 

Vayu relates to the nerve-force. 

It is responsible for all movement 
in the mind and body. 

The movement of Vayu even regulates the 
balance of Pitta and Kapha. 


Pitta relates to internal fire, bile, body heat, di¬ 
gestive enzymes, physio-chemical, biological, 
metabolic and endocrine systems. It is responsible 
for digesting the chyle into a protoplasmic sub¬ 
stance like sperm and ovum. 







Section 1: Fundamentals 


Chapter 2: The Human Universe 



The nerve network of the mind and body. 



Blood Circulation 

Principal Veins and Arteries 



Internal Jugular Vein 
Common Carotid Artery 


Subclavian Artery 


Superior Vena Cava 


Axillary Artery 


Pulmonary Vein 


Hepatic Vein 


Superior 

Mesenteric Artery 
Common Iliac Artery 

Internal Iliac Artery 

External Iliac Artery 


Pulmonary Artery 
Axillary Vein 


Common Hepatic Artery 
Cephalic Vein 
Basilic Vein 
Splenic Artery 
Splenic Vein 
Cubital Vein 
Radial Vein 
Renal Artery 
Renal Vein 




The bones are primarily affected by Vayu 


& H 


Pitta relates to the circulatory, endocrine, 
and digestive systems 


































The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Kapha fills the intercellular spaces of the body 
as connective tissue. Examples of these tissues in¬ 
clude mucus, synovial fluid, and tendons. Kapha 
is responsible for the gross structure of the body 
(solid and liquid/phlegm-plasma). Each person is 
made up of a combination of these elements. 



Together, the doshas are responsible for cata¬ 
bolic and anabolic metabolism. Catabolism breaks 
down complex internal bodies, and Vayu (air en¬ 
ergy) sets this energy free into simpler waste. 
Anabolism takes food and builds it into more com¬ 
plex bodies. The summit of the metabolic process 
is protoplasm or essential matter [proteins, carbo¬ 
hydrates, lipids, and inorganic salts]. Lifeless food 
becomes living protoplasm and is set free as use¬ 
ful energy or excess heat or motion that is emitted 
from the body. Thus, the purpose of the three 
doshas is to move the lymph chyle (the by-prod¬ 
uct of digested foods) throughout the body. This 
nourishes and builds the body tissues. When any 
or all of the doshas develop imbalance, the body 
ceases to be nourished, and disease develops. 

The three doshas (Vayu, Pitta, Kapha) exist 
throughout the entire body, in every cell, yet are 
predominant (their sites of origin) in the colon, 
small intestine, and stomach, respectively. Some 
authorities say that Vayu primarily resides below 
the navel, Pitta from the navel to the heart, and 
Kapha, above the heart. 


Vayu is also found in (governing) the waist, 
thighs, ear, bones, and skin. Pitta also governs the 
navel, sweat, lymph, blood, eye, and skin. Kapha 
additionally controls the chest, throat, head, bone 
joints, small intestine, plasma, fat, nose, and 
tongue. 


Properties of the Three Doshas 

Vayu: Dry, light, cold, rough, subtle, moving 
Pitta: Slightly oily, hot, light, odorous, liquid 
Kapha: Oily, cold, heavy, slow, smooth, slimy, 
static. 

Each of the three doshas has five 
divisions or responsibilities. 


5 Vayus 

Each of the five Vayus is responsible for vari¬ 
ous physical and mental functions of the cerebral- 
spinal and sympathetic nerves. 

Fran is located in the head and governs the 
chest, throat, mind, heart, sense organs, intelli¬ 
gence, expectorating, sneezing, belching, inspira¬ 
tion, and swallowing of food—outward movement. 

Udan resides in the chest and controls the nose, 
navel, and throat, and is responsible for initiating 
speech, effort, enthusiasm, the capacity to work, 
complexion, and memory—upward movement. 

Vyan is found in the heart and rapidly moves 
throughout the body. It regulates all body move¬ 
ments, including walking, raising and lowering of 
the body parts, and opening and closing the eyes. 

Saman is located near the digestive fire. It works 
in the alimentary tract (absorbing nutrients and 
excreting wastes), and other abdominal organs. It 
holds food in the alimentary tract, helps digest it, 
separates nutrients from waste, and eliminates the 
waste—equalized movement. 

Apart is seated in the colon, and controls the 
waist, bladder, genitals, and thighs. Its main func¬ 
tion is downward movement of wastes (feces, 
urine), reproductive fluid, menstrual fluid, and it 
also controls the downward movement of the fe¬ 
tus. 






















Section 1: Fundamentals 


Chapter 2: The Human Universe 


5 Pittas 

Pachaka exists in the small intestine, stomach, 
and colon as non-liquid heat, bile, or digestive fire. 
The fire digests and transforms food, emulsifying 
food fats and separating absorbable nutrients from 
waste, so they may be passed to lacteals by ab¬ 
sorption. [Food becoming partially digested in the 
stomach is known as chyme. This chyme passes 
into the small intestine where it becomes digested 
by the pancreatic juice and bile. The usable by¬ 
product is lymph and fatty matter, or chyle. The 
chyle moves through lacteals, or lymphatic ves¬ 
sels which carry chyle from the small intestine to 
the thoracic duct. From the thoracic duct, the chyle 
is sent into the blood.] Pachaka (digestive en¬ 
zymes), through digestion, automatically nourishes 
the other four Pittas. 

Raniaka is located in the stomach, liver, and 
spleen, and gives color to lymph chyle when it is 
transformed into blood as it passes through the liver 
and spleen. 

Sadhaka is found in the heart. It helps in per¬ 
forming mental functions such as knowledge, in¬ 
telligence, and consciousness by maintaining 
rhythmic cardiac contractions. 

Alochaka resides in the retina of the eyes and 
governs sight. 

Bhrajaka resides in the skin. It regulates com¬ 
plexion by keeping secretions from the sweat and 
sebaceous glands of the skin active. 

5 Kaphas 

Avalambaka is found in the chest and creates 
cohesion, softness, moistness, and liquidity, which 
result in maintaining body strength. 

Kledaka is in the stomach, liquefying hard food 
masses. 

Bodhaka is found in the tongue and is respon¬ 
sible for taste. 

Tarpaka exists in the head and nourishes the 
sense organs. 

Shleshaka is located in the bone joints and lu¬ 
bricates them. 

People who are predominantly an air (Vayu) 
prakriti will have different experiences depending 

dr 


on whether their dosha is balanced or in excess. 
Balanced \ayu-prakriti individuals will be adapt¬ 
able, cheerful, have natural healing tendencies, be 
thin-framed, and very tall or very short. If there is 
excess Vayu in their bodies, they may be very thin, 
have dry skin, gas, constipation, bone problems, 
or arthritis. They may talk very fast or become eas¬ 
ily tired. Mentally, they may quickly grasp con¬ 
cepts but soon forget them; be anxious, worried, 
fearful, or nervous. 

Pitta-dominant individuals, when healthy and 
balanced, will be warm, and have clear, penetrat¬ 
ing thoughts. They will tend to be leaders and/or 
athletic. They will be of moderate, muscular build, 
and will be passionate. When they overheat, they 
may find themselves impatient, hot-tempered, or 
too critical. Physically, they will develop heat-re¬ 
lated problems like ulcers, infections, rashes or 
acne, eye problems, or high blood pressure. 

The Kapha-paramount individuals, when bal¬ 
anced, are loyal and calm. Physically, they are big 
boned and strong, with deep-toned voices. When 
Kapha is excessive, they tend toward water ex¬ 
cesses like water retention, being overweight, or 
having bronchitis. Mentally, they will find them¬ 
selves lethargic, too attached, and sentimental. 

As we discussed earlier, each person is made 
up of a combination of these elements, yet each 
usually has a combination predominantly of two 
or all three of these elements. These elements in 
turn, form three physiological principles, Vayu 
(ether and air), Pitta (fire), and Kapha (water and 
earth). Like the elements, people are predominantly 
made up of one or more or these doshas. 

People fall into seven prakriti categories: 

1. Vayu 5. Pitta/Kapha 

2. Pitta 6. Kapha/Vayu 

3. Kapha 7. Tridoshic (equal amounts). 

4. Vayu/Pitta (combination) 

These constitutions may be further subdivided, 

8, 9. Vayu/Pitta (with Vayu or Pitta being predomi¬ 
nant) 















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


10, 11. Vayu/Kapha (with Vayu or Kapha being 
predominant) 

12,13. Pitta/Kapha (with Pitta or Kapha being pre¬ 
dominant) 

14-19. Tridoshic (six additional constitutions, with 
one or two doshas being more predominant: e.g., 
Vayu predominance, Pitta and Kapha predomi¬ 
nance, etc.) 

Three external reasons cause doshas to become 
increased (imbalanced): 

1. Time of day or season (e.g., around noon¬ 
time is ruled by Pitta; Fall is predominantly a Vayu 
time) 

2. From inadequate, excessive or untimely sen¬ 

sory experiences (e.g., excessive loud music, over¬ 
eating) 

3. Actions (e.g., excessive speaking, inadequate 
exercise, etc.) 

Agnis: Digestive Fire (Enzymes) 

Most diseases are due to poor digestion. Agni 
(enzyme) is found in the alimentary canal and di¬ 
gests food. The normal digestion of the three 
doshas produces Samdgni. Digestive activity 
(healthy, deficient or excessive) is governed by the 
doshas becoming aggravated. The three doshas 
produce three agnis ( vishamdgni, tikshndgni and 
mandagni respectively). Excess Vayu in the body 
produces weak, irregular digestion, and causes gas. 

Excess Pitta creates a situation like an over¬ 
heated furnace. Food burns up quickly, and per¬ 
sons experience burning sensations, thirst, acid 
indigestion, etc. In some cases the agni fire even 
bums up nutrients, causing malnutrition. 

When excess Kapha is in the digestive tract, the 
digestive fire is low, making it difficult to digest 
any foods. As a result, a person feels dull, poor, 
inadequate, and lethargic; the stomach is heavy, or 
the person may experience constipation. Vayu dis¬ 
orders produce hard stools from the dryness caused 
by gas. Pitta stools are soft or liquid due to excess 
heat. Kapha stools are moderate. A healthy stool 
is also moderate and easily eliminated once or 
twice a day. 


Thirteen agnis reside in the body and are re¬ 
sponsible for digestion, 

Jatharagni : Works at the gastrointestinal level, 
governing basic digestion and the 12 other agnis. 

5 Bhutagnis : Metabolize the five elements that 
are present in the body’s tissues. They are a form 
of heat that is always present in all the tissues that 
are responsible for proper function and develop¬ 
ment of the tissues. 

7 Dhatagnis : Metabolize in the seven tissues 
(dhatus ). This is a biochemical process beyond 
food digestion. It includes anabolic and catabolic 
activity. 

Body Tissues and Wastes 
(The 7 Dhatus and 3 Malas) 

Tissue Layers (Dhatus) 

The Ayurvedic view of the body has many simi¬ 
larities to modern beliefs. Seven tissue systems 
(dhatus ) are in the body. Each tissue is primarily 
governed by one of the three elements. Each dhatu 
is developed or transformed out of the previous 
tissue layer, starting with rasa (plasma). If plasma 


Tissue Layer 
( Dhatus ) 

Governing 

Dosha 

1. Plasma (rasa) 

Kapha/water 

2. Blood ( rakta ) 

Pitta/fire 

3. Muscle (mamsa) 

Kapha/water 

4. Fat (medas) 

Kapha/water 

5. Bone (asthi) 

Vayu/air 

6. Nerves -fluid/ 
marrow (majja) 

Kapha/water 

7. Reproductive 
tissues (shukra) 

Kapha/water 





















Section 1: Fundamentals 


Chapter 2: The Human Universe 


With insight into the governing dosha, the cause 
of a diseased dhatu is accurately determined. For 
example, if a person has cancer in the blood, we 
know that excess Pitta (heat, toxins) exists in the 
blood. If a person has osteoporosis, then too much 
Vayu is in the bones. Muscular Dystrophy would 
be an example of a muscular or Kapha problem. 

Once the elemental cause of the illness is 
known, therapies are used to balance the system 
through reducing the excess elements(s) and in¬ 
creasing the deficient one(s). Therapies include the 
use of herbs, foods, and lifestyle variations. 

Signs and Symptoms of 


Vitiated 

Tissues (Dhatus) 

Tissues (Dhatus) 

Signs & Symptoms 

Plasma (rasa) 

restlessness, palpitation, 
cardiac pain, exhaustion 
without cause, irritated by 
loud noises 

Hemoglobin/ 
Blood (rakta) 

roughness, dryness, skin 
cracks, loss of luster 

Muscle (rndmsa) 

emaciation (especially of 
buttocks, neck, and 
abdomen) 

Fat (medas) 

cracking joints, eye 
lassitude, overly thin, 
exhaustion 

Bone (asthi) 

falling hair, nails, teeth; 
loose joints 

Marrow (majja) 

thinness, weakness, bone 
lightness, Vayu bone 
diseases 

Reproductive 
essence (shukra) 

weakness, dry mouth, 
pallor, lassitude, exertion, 
impotence, non-ejaculation 
of semen 


cellaneous waste includes tears (eye), spit (tongue), 
oily secretions (skin), mucoid secretions (mucus 
membrane), and smegma (genitalia excreta). Malas 
(bodily wastes) help maintain the functioning of 
our organs. 

Feces (purlsha) provide support and tone, as 
well as maintaining the temperature of the colon. 
Improper functioning can lead to Vayu illness like 
worry, fear, ungroundedness, nervousness, head¬ 
aches, gas, distention, and constipation. Function¬ 
ing of the feces is damaged by excessive use of 
purgatives, colonics, worry, and fear (fear can both 
create improper functioning or be a by-product of 
this dysfunction). It is also damaged by excessive 
travel, the wrong foods (such as “junk food,” or 
those foods that are too light or too heavy), over¬ 
sleeping, coffee, drugs, antibiotics, insufficient 
exercise, and prolonged diarrhea. In Ayurvedic lit¬ 
erature it has been clearly stated that debilitated 
persons suffering from tuberculosis should not be 
given any kind of purgatives, as it is the feces that 
preserve the temperature of such persons. 

Urine ( mutra ) expels water and other solid 
wastes from the body. Poor urine elimination re¬ 
sults in bladder pain or infection, difficult urina¬ 
tion, fever, thirst, dry mouth, or dehydration. Di¬ 
uretic drugs, alcohol, excessive sex, trauma, fright, 
or too few liquids damage it. 

Sweat ( sweda ) controls the body temperature 
by way of expelling excess water and toxins, cools 
the body, moistens the skin and hair, carried ex¬ 
cess fat from the body, and purifies the blood. Ex¬ 
cess sweating can cause skin diseases (usually Pitta 
related) like eczema, boils, fungus, burning skin, 
dehydration, fatigue, or convulsions (Vayu- 
caused). Deficient sweating can result in stiff hair, 
skin fissures, dry skin, dandruff, wrinkles, or sus¬ 
ceptibility to colds and flu (i.e., peripheral circu¬ 
lation). Too much dry food, lack of salt, excess or 
deficient exercise, and excessive use of diaphoretic 
herbs or excess sweating damage the sweating 
functions. 


Body Wastes (Malas) Life Sap (Ojas) 

Another important factor in health is the proper Ojas (the life sap) is the essence of all the tis- 
elimination of waste: feces, urine, and sweat (mis- sues ( dhatus ). It pervades every part of the body. 

& As 

















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


(Some authorities believe ojas is a combination of 
eight different drops (ashtabindu) of liquid, se¬ 
creted from the pineal gland.) Excessive sex, drugs, 
talking, loud music, insufficient rest or burnout, 
and high technology deplete Ojas. Signs of dimin¬ 
ished ojas are fear, worry, sensory organ pain, poor 
complexion, cheerlessness, roughness, emaciation, 
immune system disorders, and easily contracting 
diseases. 

Tastes (Rasas) 

Ayurveda says there is a total of six tastes. Each 
taste is governed by a dosha. These tastes may ei¬ 
ther aggravate or pacify the doshas, dhatus, and 
malas. 


Taste (Rasa) 

Dosha 

Aggravated 

Dosha 

Balanced 

Sweet/ swadu 

Kapha 

Vayu/Pitta 

Sour lamia 

Pitta/Kapha 

Vayu 

Salty Havana 

Pitta/Kapha 

Vayu 

Pungent /katu 

Pitta/Vayu 
(in excess) 

Kapha 

Bitter /tikta 

Vayu 

Pitta/Kapha 

Astringent Jkashaya 

Vayu 

Pitta/Kapha 


Tastes provide varying degrees of nourishing 
strength. Sweet taste is the most nourishing, and 
as each taste becomes less nourishing, it becomes 
more bitter, until it is astringent—and the least 
nourishing. 

This is also the order of tastes that get digested 
(so eating sweets first is better, and astringent foods 
last). Some authorities state that if one were to eat 
sweets last, the body would digest this taste first, 
letting the other tastes pass undigested through the 
system. By the time the sweets are digested, the 
other foods have passed through the system with¬ 
out being digested. Other authorities believe that a 
little sweet taste at the end of the meal stimulates 
digestion. 


Every substance, including some foods, may 
have more than one taste (i.e., primary and sec¬ 
ondary tastes). Substances alleviate doshas, aggra¬ 
vate doshas, or maintain health. When health is at 
least slightly in balance, persons are advised to have 
a little of each taste daily. Rasa is discussed in a 
Chapter 6, the chapter on nutrition. 

Potency: (Vlrya)/After Taste: (Vipaka) 

The qualities of substances are either hot 
(ushna) or cold (slta). Hot tastes generally aggra¬ 
vate Pitta and mitigate Vayu and Kapha. Cold tastes 
mitigate Pitta and aggravate the rest. After diges¬ 
tion, one experiences an aftertaste, which is either 
sweet, sour, or pungent. Again, this is important in 
balancing or imbalancing the doshas. These aspects 
will also be discussed in the chapter on nutrition. 

20 Qualities (Gunas) 

Each substance has qualities associated with 
one dosha. Again, like increases like and oppo¬ 
sites reduce doshas, dhatus, and malas. Ayurveda 
has developed a remarkably detailed and precise 
analysis of the qualities. These attributes are used 
in finding which qualities will heal or aggravate 
the doshas. For example, substances that are heavy 
and cold are not suggested for those with weak 
digestion, such as Vayu and Kapha doshas. Foods 
that are hot and oily heal the Vayu dosha. 
















Section 1: Fundamentals 


Chapter 2: The Human Universe 


In the table below the 20 gunas or qualities are 
listed. 


1. Heavy /guru 

11. Light /laghu 

2. Slow/manda 

12. Quick/tekshna 

3. Cold Uiima 

13. Hot/ ushnd 

4. Oily/snigdha 

14. Dry /ruksha 

5. Smooth/ 
shlakshna 

15. Rough /khara 

6. Solid/sandra 

16. Liquid /drava 

7. Soft /mridu 

17. Hard Jkathina 

8. Stable/sthira 

18. Moving /cala 

9. Subtle/ 
sukshma 

19. Lar gdsthula 

10. Non-slimy/ 
vishada 

20. Slimy/picchila 


Disease ( roga ) is caused by deficient, improper, 
or excess contact with 1) seasons (e.g., excess cold 
in winter), 2) sensory objects (e.g., overeating), and 
3) activities (e.g., over exercise). Health ( arogya ) 
is achieved through proper contact with the three. 

Disease is caused by imbalancing the doshas. 
For example, if a Pitta dosha (fiery person) eats 
much ginger, they will create excess fire in the 
body. This results in Pitta disorders like acid indi¬ 
gestion. Diseases occur due to internal or external 
factors, and reside in the body or mind. Disease is 
caused by rajas (over-activity) and lamas (lethargy) 
psychological/ spiritual factors. 

Three Mental Qualities: 

Sattwa, Rajas, Tamas 

The three gunas, sattwa, rajas, and tamas are 
found in nature and in the mind, paralleling the 
three doshas of the body. Sattwa, or purity, is the 
preferred mental state because a person with this 

dr 


quality is calm, alert, kind, and thoughtful. A per¬ 
son whose mind is predominantly rajasic (too ac¬ 
tive) is always seeking diversions (incessant ac¬ 
tivity). The tamasic- predominant mind is a dull, 
lethargic mind. 

Just as combinations of Vayu, Pitta, and Kapha 
exist for the body, the mind has combinations of 
sattwa, rajas, and tamas. Individuals whose minds 
are sattwic and rajasic are those who enthusiasti¬ 
cally study spiritual and holistic measures to im¬ 
prove themselves. Rajasic/tamasic minded people 
will actively work and exercise to overcome their 
lethargy. 

Mental balance and the development of purity 
and peace develop the mind towards a sattwic mind. 
This is the first stage of samaclhi or spiritual real¬ 
ization. 

To decide the cause of illness, the practitioner 
observes, questions, and takes the pulse of the pa¬ 
tient. Illness can be understood by learning its 
cause, or seeing it in its incubatory, beginning, 
developmental, or advanced stages. 

The Vayu Mind 

When Vayu dosha persons are balanced, 

they are cheerful, creative, and adaptable. 

When Vayu doshas are imbalanced, they are 
worried, nervous, fearful, and giddy. 

The mental constitution of Vayu individuals 
tends towards fear, anxiety, and insecurity. They 
can easily be deceived with threats or promises. 
They do not have much courage, are of solitary 
nature, and possess few intimate friends (although 
they form friends with those in other social circles). 
Vayu people do not make good leaders or followers 
and are not materialistic (as they spend and earn 
freely). 

Sattwic influence creates comprehension, the 
need for unity and healing, and creates a positive 
mental outlook. 

Raj asic influence creates indecisiveness, 
unreliability, hyperactivity, and anxiety. 

Tamasic influence creates fear, a servile atti¬ 
tude, dishonesty, depression, self-destructiveness, 
addictive behavior, sexual perversions, animal in¬ 
stincts, or suicidal thoughts. 

Xk 

















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


The Pitta Mind 

When Pitta dosha individuals are healthy 
or balanced, they are goal-oriented, 
powerful, warm, athletic. 

When Pitta doshas are imbalanced, 
they are burnt out, angry, impatient, 
irritable, and critical. 

Mental Pitta individuals possess fiery emotions 
l ik e irritability, anger, and hate. Mentally, they have 
abilities of penetration, yet can be aggressive and 
seldom sentimental. They are determined, 
articulate, convincing, and yet may try to dominate 
others with their will and ideas. They are self- 
righteous and may become fanatical. Pitta people 
are good leaders, ambitious, and work hard to 
achieve great goals. They help their families and 
friends, but are cruel and unforgiving to enemies. 
Also, they are bold, adventurous, daring and enjoy 
challenges. Although they have much clarity, they 
lack compassion. 

Sattwic influence creates clarity, intelligence, 
leadership, warmth, and independence. 

Rajasic influence creates willfulness, ambition, 
anger, manipulation, vanity, impulsiveness, and 
aggressiveness. 

Tamasic influence creates vindictiveness, vio¬ 
lence, hate, criminality, and psychopathic behav¬ 
ior. 

The Kapha Mind 

When Kapha dosha persons are healthy they 

love to cook for others, are strong, and loyal. 
Imbalanced Kapha doshas become 
lethargic, hoarding, overly materialistic 

These people are the emotional ones, full of 
love, desire, romance, and sentiment. However, 
they also have the negative emotions of lust and 
greed. Kapha doshas find it hard to adapt to new 
situations, yet they are very loyal. They have many 
friends and are close to their families, communi¬ 
ties, religions, and countries. They are more com¬ 


fortable with practical knowledge than with ab¬ 
stract ideas. 

Sattwic influence creates calmness, peace, love, 
compassion, faith, nurturing, and forgiveness. 
Rajasic influence creates greed for money, mate¬ 
rial luxuries, and comfort. They are too 
sentimental, controlling, attached, and lustful. 
Tamasic influences create dullness, sloth, lethargy, 
depression, lack of care and a tendency to steal. 


Developing Samadhi: Divine Peace 

Some patients have one type of physi- 
\ cal constitution combined with another 
type of mental constitution (i.e., a heavy and ner¬ 
vous person has a Kapha body and Vayu mind). 
Consequently, when suggesting healing measures 
for the Kapha body illness, the practitioner takes 
care not to aggravate the Vayu mental constitu¬ 
tion. In this example, fire-increasing measures are 
recommended, including herbs, foods, and aromas, 
but not air-increasing ones. Mental disease is re¬ 
lated to rajas and tamas, the activity and lethargy 
principles of the three gunas (qualities). The gunas 
also reflect the level of the soul’s development. If 
the mind is sattwic, or pure, then clarity exists. A 
sattwic- minded person perceives the knowledge of 
Divinity. A sattwic mind is also the first stage of 
samadhi. Poor mental discrimination is the cause 
of all illness, making one dishonest, self-destruc- 
tive, and hurtful to others. One would overindulge 
in “junk food,” entertainment, etc. The best way to 
heal is by following a sattwic lifestyle. This in¬ 
cludes meditation, compassionate actions, ethical 
and virtuous behavior, healthy, organic foods, and 
living within the rhythms of nature. People in 
whom sattwa predominates, see the good in all 
things (including the value an illness may offer), 
and they are the healthiest people as well. 

Tamas creates lethargy, dullness, and a cloudy 
perception. This is caused by fear and ignorance, 
and plays on one’s animal nature. A person with 
this frame of mind would choose not to do much 
of anything. When this mental quality is predomi- 







Section 1: Fundamentals 


Chapter 2: The Human Universe 


nant, such persons will suppress their emotions. 
Emotional suppression is a major cause of severe 
illness, like cancer. Stagnancy describes their emo¬ 
tional makeup. Negative mindedness and self-de¬ 
struction define their personality. 

Rajas causes a turbulent, or distracted, mind. It 
makes one look outside for comfort and fulfillment. 
It causes one to seek external validation. Rajas 
makes one think love is derived from an external 
relationship, not from within. It makes one will¬ 
ful, egoistic, and manipulative. 

When rajas and tamas exist in the mind simul¬ 
taneously, activity is devoted to greedy purposes. 
These persons also overextend themselves for those 
ends. They blame others for their condition and 
expect others to cure them. 

When rajas is free from a trace of tamas , it then 
can develop purer activities, like studying or learn¬ 
ing about health and spirituality. Yet the rajasic- 
minded person may still burn out during the learn¬ 
ing process. 

Often, just as people have some qualities of all 
three doshas, that mind has some of each guna. 
Seven mental guna types exist: sattwa, rajas, 
tamas, sattwa-raj as, sattwa-tamas, rajas-tamas, 
and triguna (equal amounts of the three gunas). 
Just as external factors may cause dosha derange¬ 
ment, the rajasic nature of our modem technologi¬ 
cal society may cause mental rajasic derange¬ 
ments. 


Mental Qualities: Prana, Tejas & Ojas 

The mind has three governing agents similar to 
Vayu, Pitta, and Kapha. They are called prana (air), 
tejas (fire), and ojas (life sap). Again, it is the bal¬ 
ance of these three elements that decide mental 
balance and clarity. Too much prana will create 
anxiety, worry, insomnia, and loss of memory and 
concentration. (This prana is different from the air 
we think of as respiration. Here, prana means life- 
force, soul, or kundalini shakti). Excess prana dries 
up ojas, the sap that creates one’s spiritual life sap. 
Through meditation, ojas becomes transmuted into 
life energy, or “ kundalini shakti ,” which develops 
one’s Self-realization. Spiritually speaking, an 
undetectable tube runs up the middle of our spine 

dr 


called the “ sushumna ” in which the kundalini en¬ 
ergy travels. Without this shakti energy, not only 
is our physical and mental health used up, but also 
so is our spiritual development. Excess tejas also 
depletes ojas by burning it up, whereas excess ojas 
can create a lethargic person. 

Doshas and the Organs 

Each organ is primarily governed by one dosha. 
By knowing which dosha controls which organs, 
one achieves the health of the appropriate organ, 
through balancing the elements ( doshas ) 


Vayu 

Pitta 

Kapha 

colon* 

small 

intestine* 

stomach* 

brain 

liver 

lungs 

thighs 

spleen 

pericardium 

bones 

gall bladder 

triple warmer 

kidney 

kidney 


urinary 

bladder 

heart 

urinary 

bladder 

pancreas 

pancreas 

pancreas 


uterus 

testes 


* Origin Sites of the doshas 


By merely knowing which dosha is related to 
which tissue layer and body system, Ayurveda can 
identify and bring balance to health problems. For 
example, diabetes is a condition of the water (glu¬ 
cose) metabolism srota. Kapha dosha causes this 
condition (from sweet tastes). By removing wa¬ 
ter-increasing foods and herbs from one’s diet, and 
eating fire and air increasing foods (bitter and pun¬ 
gent tastes), diabetes is controlled. Certain herbs 
like shilajit and gudmar, and special Ayurvedic 
abhyahgas (massage-like) are also used specifi¬ 
cally for healing the pancreas and kidneys. 

'MA. 
















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Health, Excess & Deficiencies of the Dhatus 
Plasma/Rasa 

Excess : Saliva, phlegm, blocked channels, loss 
of appetite, nausea, Kapha is increased through¬ 
out body. 

Deficient : Rough skin, dry lips, dehydration, 
weariness and exhaustion after slight activity, in¬ 
tolerance to sound, tremors, palpitations, heart 
pain, a sense of emptiness, poor nutrition. 

Healthy : Good complexion, healthy hair, vital¬ 
ity, compassionate, and happy. 


Healthy : Able to exercise, strong, adaptable. 
Well developed neck, shoulder and thigh muscles. 
Courageous, integrity, fortitude and a strong char¬ 
acter. 



Pronator Teres 


Rotator Arm Muscles 


Blood/ Rakta 

Excess : Skin disease, abscesses, liver, and 
spleen enlargement, hypertension, tumors, de¬ 
lirium, poor digestion, jaundice, burning sensation, 
bleeding, redness in skin, eyes, and urine. 

Deficient : Low blood pressure, pallor, low skin 
luster, blood vessel collapse, shock, desiring sour 
and cold foods, loose and dry hair, dry, rough, 
cracked s ki n. 

Healthy : Good color in cheeks, hands, feet, lips, 
tongue lustrous eyes, warm skin, vital yet sensi¬ 
tive to sun and heat, passion. 



„ „ , Extensor Digitorum (Manus 

Extensor Carpi Ulnaris / 


Extensor Carpi Radialis 

Extensor Pollicis Brevis 

Extensor Carpi Radialis Brev 


Extensor Arm Muscles 


Flexor Digitorum Profundus 



Flexor Pollicis Longus 


Leucocytes 

(granular) 


Blood cells 


Flexor Digitorum Superficial^ 




Erythrocytes 


Platelets 


Muscle/Mamsa 

Excess : Enlarged liver, swelling, tumors in 
muscle sites, heaviness or swelling of glands, over¬ 
weight or obesity, irritability, aggression, fibroids, 
miscarriage, low sexual vitality. 

Deficient : Weariness, loose limbs, lack of co¬ 
ordination, emaciation of hips, back of neck and 
abdomen, fear, unhappiness, insecurity. 



Flexor Carpi Radialis 


Flexor Carpi Ulnaris 


Palmaris Longo 


Flexor Arm Muscles 














Section 1: Fundamentals 


Chapter 2: The Human Universe 


Fat/Medas 

Excess : Overweight and obesity, lacking mo¬ 
bility, asthma, fatigue, sexual debility, thirst, dia¬ 
betes, shortened life span, hypertension, breast, 
sagging belly and thighs, emotional fear and at¬ 
tachment. 

Deficient : Weary eyes, fatigue, cracking joints, 
enlarged spleen, limb emaciation, thin abdomen, 
brittle or weak hair, bones, nails, teeth. 

Healthy : Lubricated tissues, oily hair, eyes, and 
feces. Ample body fat (not excessive). Melodious 
voice, loving, joyful, humorous, and affectionate. 

Bone/Asthi 

Excess : Spurs, extra bones and teeth, extra large 
frame, joint pain, low stamina, anxiety, arthritis, 
bone cancer, or gigantism in extreme cases. 

Deficient : Pain or loose joints, falling of teeth, 
hair and nails, poor bone and tooth formation, fa¬ 
tigue, dwarfism in extreme cases. 

Healthy : Large joints, and prominent bones, 
flexibility, long, feet, large, strong, white teeth, 
patient, consistent, stable, hard working. 



Marrow/ Majja 

Excess : Limbs, eyes and joint (origin) heavi¬ 
ness, deep non-healing sores, cloudy eyes, and in¬ 
fections. 


Deficient : Weak and porous bones, small joint 
pain, seeing spots or darkness before the eyes, 
dizzy, low sexual vitality, feeling emptiness, and 
fear. Vayu becomes imbalanced from low nerve 
tissue supply. 

Healthy : Strong joints, clear eyes, good speech, 
able to withstand pain, sharp, clear, sensitive mind 
with good memory, open, feeling, compassionate, 
receptive. 



Autonomic N.S. 


Semen/ Shukra 

Excess : Excess sexual desire that leads to an¬ 
ger, excess semen, semen stones, and a swollen 
prostate. 

Deficient : Low vitality and sexual desire, im¬ 
potence, sterility, difficult and slow ejaculation, 
bloody semen. One may experience lassitude, wea¬ 
riness, a dry mouth, lower back pain, fear, anxiety, 
and lack of love. 






























































The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Healthy : Attractive body, lustrous eyes, good 
hair growth, well-formed sexual organs, charm, 
loving, compassionate, empathic. Excess produces 
Kapha. Deficiencies produce Vayu. 



Srotas: Body Channel Systems 

Other parallels exist between East and West 
concerning srotas. Srotas are the channels, pores, 
or systems that carry or circulate the doshas and 
tissues ( dhatus ) or their elements to the various 
organs. During this process of circulation the 
dhatus are transformed from the first to the last 
tissue layer (rasa through shukra). Each dhatu has 
two aspects: nutrition for its own tissue layer, and 
sustenance for the next developing dhatu. 

Ayurveda notes 16 systems, several more than 
those that are currently considered. The origin sites, 
which carry each dhatu, are listed on the next page. 










Section 1: Fundamentals 


Chapter 2: The Human Universe 


Systems ( Srotas ) 

Main Organ Site: Related 
Dosha 

Signs of Excess 

Respiratory 
(Vital Breath) 
Pranavaha Srotas 

Heart, colon; nose, trachea, 
lungs alimentary tract, pleurae: 
Vayu 

Hyperventilation 

Digestive 
Annavaha Srotas 

Digestive/small intestine: Pitta 

Hyperacidity, diarrhea 

Metabolism (water) 
Udakavaha Srotas 

Palate and pancreas: Kapha 

Hunger, hypoglycemia 

Lymphatic/Plasma 
Rasavaha Srotas 

Heart and blood vessels: Kapha 

Edema, swollen glands, lymphatics 

Circulatory/Blood 
(Hemoglobin) 
Raktavaha Srotas 

Liver and spleen: Pitta 

Hypertension, disorders of skin, 
spleen, or bleeding; abscesses, 
jaundice, inflammations 

Muscular 

Mdmsavaha Srotas 

Ligaments and skin: Kapha 

Tremors 

Fat/Adipose 
Medovaha Srotas 

Kidney and organ coverings: 
Kapha 

Edema, obesity 

Skeletal 

Asthivaha Srotas 

Adipose tissue, hips: Vayu 

Extra bone tissue 

Marrow 

Majjavaha Srotas 

Bones and joints: Vayu 

Insomnia, pain, tremors, 
hypersensitivity, overly perceptive 

Reproductive 
Shukravaha Srotas 

External genitals: Kapha 

Premature ejaculation, leukorrhea, 
spermatorrhea, nocturnal emission 

Sebaceous/Sweat 

Swedavaha Srotas 

Fat and hair follicles: Kapha 

Excessive oily sweat 

Excretory 

Purlshavaha Srotas 

Rectum and colon: Vayu 

Diarrhea 

Urinary 

Mutravaha Srotas 

Kidney and urinary bladder: 
Kapha 

Excess or frequent urination 

Female Reproductive 
Artavaha Srotas 

Uterus (menstruation, 
hormones): Pitta 

Menorrhagia (excess menstruation) 

Female Reproductive 
Stanyavaha Srotas 

Breast milk and menses: Kapha 

Excess flow of breast milk 


From this chart we see that a Vayu excess will create problems in the colon, rectum, skeleton, or nervous 
system. Pitta derangement occurs in the female reproductive, digestive, and circulatory systems. Kapha rules 
the remaining channels: metabolic, lymphatic, muscular, adipose, reproductive, sebaceous, and female 
reproductive subsystem (breast milk system). When these srotas are depleted, specific symptoms develop: 

w 























The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Systems 

(Srotas) 

Signs of Deficiency 

Vital Breath 

Pranavaha 

Breathing abnormalities (e.g., shortness of breath) with sound or pain 

Digestion 

Annavaha 

Dry tongue, palate, lips, throat, pancreas, excessive thirst, low appetite 

Water 

Udakavaha 

Foss of hunger, anorexia, indigestion, nausea, vomiting, hyperglycemia 

Plasma 

Rasavciha 

Foss of hunger, anorexia, nausea, heaviness, drowsiness, fever and fainting, 
anemia, circulatory blocks, impotence, emaciation, poor digestion, early gray hair 

and wrinkles, dehydration 

Hemoglobin 

Raktavaha 

Rough skin, fissures, cracks, loss of luster, dryness, collapsed veins and 
arteries, desire for cold & sour things, anemia, digestive disorders, purpura 

Muscle 

Mamsavaha 

Vitiation of muscle tissue, inflamed uvula or cervix, tonsillitis, boils, goiter, 
inflamed epiglottis, hemorrhoids (dilated blood vessels in the anal region or rectal 
tumors of the mucous membranes), muscle tumors, granular tumors, peeling skin, 

muscle spasms, poor muscle tone 

Fat 

Medovaha 

Incubatory signs and symptoms of urinary disorders including diabetes mellitus, 

matted hair, emaciation, dry skin 

Bone 

Asthivaha 

Weak bones and teeth, deficient bone and tooth tissue; cracking sensation in 
teeth, bone pain, discoloration and loss of hair and nails, osteoporosis 

Marrow 

Majjavaha 

Joint pain, giddiness, fainting, joint abscesses, nerve numbness, Parkinson’s 

(nerves not firing to muscles) 

Reproductive 

Shukravaha 

Impotency, sterility, or sick progeny 

Feces 

Purlshavaha 

Constipation (may occur with pain and sound) 

Urine 

Mutravaha 

Scanty, difficult, or painful urination 

Sweat 

Swedavaha 

Fack of or deficient sweat, rough skin, burning sensation, hair standing on end 

Uterus 

Artavaha 

Scanty or delayed menses, hormone deficiencies 

Breast Milk 
Stanyavaha 

Fack of breast milk 






















Section 1: Fundamentals 


Chapter 2: The Human Universe 


Channels ( Srotas) 

Causes of Srota Vitiation 

Vital Breath 
Prdnavaha 

Suppressing natural urges, oils, when hungry, exercising 

Water- 

Metabolism 

Udakavaha 

Heat, indigestion, alcohol, dry foods, excessive thirst 

Digestion 

Annavaha 

Unwholesome/indigestible food 

Plasma 

Rasavaha 

Excess heavy, cold, oily foods, over worry 

Hemoglobin 

Raktavaha 

Hot, oily, irritating foods and drinks, sun and fire exposure 

Muscle 

Mdmsavaha 

Heavy foods, sleeping right after meals 

Fat 

Medovaha 

No exercise, day naps, fatty food 

Bone 

Asthivaha 

Exercise that irritates and rubs bones, Vayu increasing foods 

Marrow 

Majjdvaha 

Crushing, excess liquids, injury and compression of bone marrow, dry 

foods 

Reproductive 

Shukravaha 

Untimely intercourse, suppression of sexual urge, excessive sexual 

indulgence 

Urine 

Mutravaha 

Suppressing urine urge, eating, drinking, and intercourse when there is an 

urge to urinate 

Feces 

Purlshavaha 

Suppressing the urge to defecate, eating overly large meals, eating before 

digesting the last meal 

Sweat 

Swedavaha 

Excess exercise, heat, anger, grief, fear, untimely eating of hot and cold 

things 




















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Channels 

C Srotas ) 

Symptoms of Blocks 

Symptoms of Overflow 

Vital Breath 

Pranavaha 

cough, asthma, hiatal hernia 

perforated lungs 

Water-Metabolism 

Udakavaha 

diabetes, pancreatic cancer, dry 
tongue, palate, lips, and throat 

anorexia, watery vomiting 

Digestion 

Annavaha 

tumors 

vomiting, perforated stomach or 
intestines (i.e. ulcer) 

Plasma 

Rasavaha 

severe swollen glands, lymph 
obstruction, lymph cancer 

bleeding with cough 

Hemoglobin 

Raktavaha 

arrhythmia, liver or spleen 
enlargement 

bleeding 

Muscle 

Mdmsavaha 

chronic inflammations, muscle 
tumors 

tearing of muscle tissue 

Fat 

Medovaha 

fat tumors (subcutaneous and 
usually benign), arteriosclerosis 

tearing of adipose tissue 

Bone 

Asthivaha 

calcification, spurs, cancer 

bones breaking 

Marrow 

Majjdvaha 

convulsions, coma, MS 

damage 

Reproductive 

Shukravaha 

impotency, swollen testes, prostate 
stones, uterine tumors 

sperm in bladder 

Urine 

Mutravaha 

difficult or painful urination, 
obstructions or stones 

bladder bursting 

Feces 

Purlshavaha 

tumors, intestinal blocks, 
diverticulitis, constipation or scanty 
stool, pain, sound 

colon perforation 

Sweat 

Swedavaha 

no sweating 

sweat in plasma 

Uterus 

Artavaha 

pain, dysmenorrhea, amenorrhea, 
chlorosis, tumors 

menses or urine in stool 

Breast Milk 
Stanyavaha 

no milk, pain, swelling, mastitis, 
cysts, tumors, cancer 

breast injury 























Section 1: Fundamentals 


Chapter 2: The Human Universe 


Using cross-referencing, by knowing a symp¬ 
tom, Ayurveda finds the imbalanced srota. 

Srotas include, veins (shim), arteries ( dhamani ), 
capillaries (rasavahini), ducts (nadl), passages 
(pantho ), tracts ( marga ), spaces inside the body 
(sharlrachidra), ducts [open at one end and closed 
at the other] ( samvritdsamvrita ), residence 
(sthana), containers (dshaya), and abodes (niketa). 
They are the visible and invisible areas in the 
body’s tissue elements. Affliction of these srotas 
creates vitiation of the tissues that reside there or 
pass through them (i.e., vitiation of one, leads to 
depletion of the other). Vayu and Kapha doshas 
cause vitiation of the srotas and tissue elements 
(Charak Samhitd - Vimdnasthdna Ch. 5 verse 9). 


The 13 Natural Urges 

Ayurveda, we have already said, emphasizes 
gentle and natural methods. To highlight this, 
Ayurveda notes that certain bodily urges are natu¬ 
ral and necessary for proper health and function¬ 
ing of the mind, emotions, and body. The result of 
suppressing these natural urges creates serious 
health problems. 


13 Natural Urges and the 
Results of Suppressing Them 

1. Sleep : Insomnia, fatigue, headache, deranges the 
vital force. 

2. Cry : Eye disease, allergies, light-headedness, 
heart disease (suppressed emotions). 


6. Yawn : Tremors, numbness, convulsions, insom¬ 
nia, harms nervous system, deranges Vayu. 

7. Vomit : Nausea, anorexia, edema, anemia, fever, 
skin diseases, damages Kapha. 

8. Eat : Low appetite and digestion, malabsorption, 
light-headedness, deranges the whole body and 
mind, suppresses the agni fire and Pitta. 

9. Drink : Dryness, deafness, fatigue, heart pain, 
bladder pain, lower backache, headache, damages 
Kapha and Vayu. 

10. Urinate : Kidney and urinary system derange¬ 
ment, difficult or painful urination, bladder pain, 
lower backache, headache, deranges Vayu and 
Kapha. 

11. Ejaculate : Weakens the reproductive and uri¬ 
nary systems, penis and testes pain, swollen pros¬ 
tate, difficult urination, cardiac pain, insomnia, 
malaise, Vayu derangement. 

12. Defecate : Weakens the colon, excretory and 
digestive srotas, causes constipation, abdominal 
weakness, abdominal distention, headaches, 
muscle cramps, deranges Vayu. 

13. Flatulate: Causes constipation, difficult urina¬ 
tion, abdominal pain, distention, weakens Vayu, 
air wastes are absorbed into the bones and mar¬ 
row, aggravating arthritis and nerves. 

It is for these reasons that Ayurveda advises 
that people follow nature’s call, living naturally 
and gently, without straining or forcing. 


3. Sneeze : Headache, facial nerve pain, numbness, 
weak senses, lung disorders, and respiratory aller¬ 
gies. 

Four Disease Conditions 

4. Breathe : Coughing, asthma, shallow breath, low All diseases are said to fall into one of four cat- 

vitality, heart disease. egories: those that are easily healed, those that are 

difficult to heal, those that are controllable but can- 

5. Belch : Cough, hiccups, anorexia, difficult not be healed, and those that cannot be healed. Each 

breathing, palpitations. form of disease has specific features. 

& A* 

















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Easily Healed : People able to receive all thera¬ 
pies, adults, self-controlled persons, not having the 
vital organs affected, having mild or few causes, 
or are currently in the first three of the six stages 
of development (see second section following this). 
Other indications include no secondary complica¬ 
tions or diseases; or the disease is different from 
the dosha, dhcitu, region, season and constitution. 
Further signs include, favorable planetary influ¬ 
ence, having a proper practitioner and therapy, or 
disease arising from only one dosha. Other signs 
include diseases that manifest themselves in only 
one disease pathway (i.e., inner, outer, central), or 
those that have recently begun to develop. 

Difficult But Able to be Healed : Diseases re¬ 
quiring surgery, dual dosha illness, or tridoshic ill¬ 
ness (some believe tridosha belongs in the next 
category). 

Controllable But Not Able to be Healed : Ill¬ 
ness remaining throughout life, which have symp¬ 
toms of easily healed description, are controllable 
through using appropriate foods, herbs, nutrition, 
and lifestyle regimens. 

Unable to be Healed : Symptoms that are the 
opposite of diseases that can be healed (described 
above), long lasting (and involving all seven dhatus 
and important vital organs), causing anxiety, delu¬ 
sion and restlessness, showing fatal signs, and caus¬ 
ing loss of sensory organs. 


Requirements of the Practitioner & Patient 

Practitioners are required to have both proper 
education and experience learned from a qualified 
teacher, to be ethical and virtuous, and to follow 
their own Ayurvedic lifestyle and spirituality —in 
actions, words, and thoughts. 

Patients should want to be healed, and should 
be able and willing to take responsibility to heal 
themselves or to be open to the therapies adminis¬ 
tered. 

The practitioner should be honest and tell pa¬ 
tients when they are unable to suggest healing 
measures, and recognize a patient who does not 
really want to be healed. The practitioner is not 
advised to attempt healing persons who cannot be 


healed. They will gain a reputation as an unscru¬ 
pulous pretender, just out to make money. 

Effects on Doshas: 

Time, Geography and Age 

The environment also plays a role in the bal¬ 
ance of the doshas. Each humor has certain times 
of the day when it is predominant. It is sometimes 
necessary to avoid imbalancing one’s dosha by 
considering these effects. 


Prevailing Dosha Times of the Day 

Kapha 

7-9 A.M. 

7-9 PM. 

Kapha/Pitta 

9-11 A.M. 

9-11 PM. 

Pitta 

11 A.M.- 

3 PM. 

11 PM- 

3 A.M. 

Vayu 

3-5 PM. 

3-5 A.M. 

Vayu/Kapha 

5-7 PM. 

5-7 A.M. 


Thus, a Pitta dosha person would not be ad¬ 
vised to spend much time in the sun between 11:00 
and 3:00 PM. They should avoid working at this 
time as well, since they will be more susceptible 
to overheating their systems during this time of 
day. 

Geography 

Geography affects a person in the same man¬ 
ner as the seasons. Hotter climates will aggravate 
Pitta doshas. Cold and damp northwest regions will 
bother the Kapha person. Dry and cold climates 
will aggravate the Vayu dosha. Consider this ex¬ 
ample of geographical therapy: If a person has a 
Kapha condition, he or she may be advised to visit 
the mountains or desert where it is drier. This cli¬ 
mate causes the person to heal properly and 
quickly. (See Chapter 12 for a detailed discussion 
of seasons). 

















Section 1: Fundamentals 


Chapter 2: The Human Universe 


Age 

Although a person’s dosha generally does not 
change during their life, five stages need to be con¬ 
sidered due to age. 


The 5 Dosha Stages of Life 


Age 

Main Dosha 

Birth-15 years 

Kapha 

15-27 years 

Kapha/Pitta 

27-42 years 

Pitta 

42-56 years 

Pitta/Vayu 

56+ years 

Vayu 


Generally, we see a tendency for children to get 
colds and congestion, a Kapha condition, what¬ 
ever their dosha. During a person’s midyears, more 
Pitta illness occurs. In the later years, we see Vayu 
attacking the bones and memory of the elderly. 
Simply by considering age factors, a person can 
stay healthy and balanced, avoiding the problems 
that come with age. 

Humor-Imbalancing Priorities 

We have discussed the situations that imbalance 
the humors: internal (foods, mind, emotions, and 
body) and external (i.e., environmental and the 
lifestyle). When two of these factors simulta¬ 
neously affect an individual, one component will 
have more of an effect on one’s dosha than the 
other will. 

L Constitution outweighs environment 
If the constitution is kept balanced, environmental 
factors will not aggravate a condition. For example, 
if children maintain a balanced constitution, they 
will be less susceptible to Kapha-type colds and 
flu in the winter. Environmental factors include 
spiritual ( karmic ) situations such as past life influ¬ 
ences. 


2, Lifestyle outweighs environment 
Following a lifestyle that balances their dosha pro¬ 
tects people from environmental aggravations (i.e., 
cold weather will not seriously affect Vayu per¬ 
sons if they take measures to keep warm). 

T, Internal intake (of foods and drinks) out¬ 

weighs external exposure 
Seasonal temperatures cannot cause any imbalance 
if a person eats herbs and foods that balance one’s 
dosha. 

4 Mind and emotions outweigh physical fac¬ 

tors 

A calm, peaceful mind and cheerful disposition 
will keep away physical imbalances. (Worry will 
cause physical illness. A clear, calm mind will pre¬ 
vent bodily disease). 

4 Degree of factors is most significant 
An excess of any one cause of an imbalance will 
create an illness. Too hot a summer day, too much 
worries, too much junk food, etc., will override 
any other balancing measures. 

6, Combinations of factors outweigh individu¬ 

als 

Two or more agents acting on a person will be more 
problematic than just one component. 


Three Desires 

Intelligent persons are advised to pursue good 
health, wealth, and Self-Realization. Health is the 
basis of life, so living a healthy lifestyle (i.e., 
wholesome diet and lifestyle, and adequate rest,) 
is essential. Living a long life without adequate 
financial resources is sure to promote troubles. The 
goal of life, according to Ayurvedic precepts, is 
Self-Realization. By living a healthy life and not 
being troubled by financial matters, persons have 
the time to focus on the prime goal of life. Thus 
Ayurveda suggests people live lives of charity, 
compassion, nonviolence, celibacy, devotion to 
Divinity and sadhanci (meditation) or prayer (see 
the discussion on Yama and Niyama in Chapter 13). 
These measures help to develop one’s Self-Real¬ 
ization. By ignoring these principles, people are 
forced to be reborn repeatedly until they follow 
these measures and gain Self-Realization. 


& A 




















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Management of the Doshas 

Vayu is reduced through heat and moistness. 

Pitta is reduced through leisure and cold. 

Kapha is reduced through heat, dry, and light¬ 
ness. 

Vayu ( Apan Vayu) gathers and becomes exces¬ 
sive while food is in the large intestine (originat¬ 
ing site). Western medicine has a parallel view. 
Carbohydrates become fermented and proteins 
become putrefied. This produces gas in the colon. 
Vayu is alleviated when food is in the stomach. 
This is why it is suggested that Vayu individuals 
have a meal every 3-4 hours. In this way, putting 
food in the stomach reduces the Vayu accumulated 
since the last meal. Because the colon is the organ 
that is the main site of Vayu and mostly affects air, 
Ayurveda recommends enemas ( bastis ) to cleanse 
the excess Vayu from the colon. 

Pitta gathers and becomes excessive when food 
is in the duodenum and small intestine (originat¬ 
ing site). It is reduced when the food reaches the 
colon. Thus, an excess of Pitta may create heart¬ 
burn about two hours after meals. Because the 
small intestine is the main site of Pitta, purgation 
(virechana ) is recommended. From the western 
point of view, the Pitta ( Pachak Pitta) is parallel to 
the digestive enzymes secreted by the pancreas, 
liver, etc. that are active in the duodenum and small 
intestine. 

Kapha gathers and becomes excessive in the 
stomach just after eating ( Kledaka Kapha). Kapha 
moistens the food and passes it on to the small 
intestine for the action of Pitta. It is the sluggish¬ 
ness of Kapha that causes one to feel sleepy after 
eating a meal. If an excess of Kapha develops, one 
may feel nauseous or want to vomit just after eat¬ 
ing. Kapha is relieved when food is in the small 
intestine. The parallels to Kapha in western medi¬ 
cine are mucoid secretions and saliva. When food 
is eaten, secretions from the mucus membranes (in 
the intestines) moisten the food. These secretions 
from the lungs rise into the trachea (from the cili¬ 
ary action) and move to the throat. Then the secre¬ 
tions are swallowed and move down the esopha¬ 
gus and finally, into the stomach. Ayurveda calls 
these excess secretions water, or Kapha. In West¬ 
ern medicine expectorants are used to remove the 


excess secretions. These expectorants have minor 
emetic properties. In large doses, these expecto¬ 
rants cause vomiting (emesis). Likewise, Kapha 
dosha is balanced by vaman (emesis). [See dia¬ 
gram below] 


The Path of Food 
Moistening Secretions 



Underlying Causes of Health: 

Agni, Ama and Ojas 

The main cause of illness is a poor digestive 
system. If the digestive fire (agni) does not burn 
strongly enough, foods do not get digested. If food 
is not digested, nutrients cannot be absorbed. When 
foods do not get digested, they sit and accumulate 
in the colon, becoming a breeding ground for yeast 
infections, toxins, gas, and constipation. Undi¬ 
gested foods are called ama. Ama is the root cause 
of most problems in the body, resulting from ex¬ 
cess Vayu or Kapha (or both). If the agni burns 
too much, heat and acid build up in the system, 
creating Pitta problems. 

Digestion begins in the mouth and stomach as 
saliva acts upon the food to digests it. Prana Vayu 
moves the food from the mouth to the stomach 
(amashaya). Once in the stomach the food takes 
on a predominantly sweet ( madhura ) taste. Food 











Section 1: Fundamentals 


Chapter 2: The Human Universe 


mixes with the digestive enzymes ( Pachaka Pitta). 
Samaria Vayu moves the food to the duodenum 
(graham) where digestion continues due to the 
digestive fire or agni (kosthagni), assuming a pun¬ 
gent taste. The liver and pancreas are involved in 
the digestive process. 

Finally, the large intestine (Vayu) absorbs the 
air and ether elements. Here, undigested foods be¬ 
come feces, and water is absorbed, transferred, and 
eliminated through the urine. 

Properly digested food creates nutritional es¬ 
sence, chyle, or plasma (rasa). Improperly digested 
food becomes undigested food toxins (dma) that 
are the cause of most diseases. Earth foods build 
protein bulk, such as muscles. Watery foods build 
vital fluids and fat. Fiery foods build enzymes and 
hemoglobin. Air foods build bone and nerve plex¬ 
uses, and ether foods build the mind. 

The health of the immune system determines 
whether diseases are warded off. Ayurveda notes 
that there is a sap-like material called ojas (per¬ 
haps analogous to pineal gland secretion) that coats 
the immune system and protects it from disease. If 
the agni fire is too low or too high, this life sap 
will be diminished. Just like the tree that creates a 
sap over the bruise in the bark to protect and heal 
the bruise, our life sap (ojas) protects and heals us 
from illness. 

Too much dryness or too much heat and fire 
eats away the life sap. A weak immune system is 


the cause of all illness, from colds to multiple scle¬ 
rosis to AIDS. To heal the immune system, one 
needs adequate rest and pure (sattwic) foods and 
herbs that specifically rebuild the ojas (life sap). 
Examples include blanched almonds or tahini, and 
ojas building herbs like shatdvarl and 
ashwagandha, respectively. 

Summary 

So, we have seen that by knowing the constitu¬ 
tion and elemental cause of one’s illness 
(vikriti), by knowing which tissue layers (dhatus), 
systems, and organs are governed by which dosha, 
and by knowing how to balance the agni fire and 
build the ojas, Ayurveda offers an individualized, 
simple, gentle, and effective form of healing. 

All diseases can be caused by any of the hu¬ 
mors, depending on which sites they relocate to, 
so the patient is examined completely, using all 
possible methods. Since disease development 
(pathogenesis) is the same for all doshas, only the 
humors, stages, sites, and directional movement 
of the humors are examined. Humors have to re¬ 
turn to their origin sites to be eliminated . 

Ayurveda emphasizes promoting health, pre¬ 
venting disease, and enhancing longevity (rejuve¬ 
nation or age reversal). By using rasayana-( reju¬ 
venation) promoting herbs and diet, good conduct, 
daily routine, and seasonal living longevity is de¬ 
veloped. 








The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 




Wo^onxaai 57 *l£ vtl±A. 








Section 2: Analysis 


Chapter 3: Analysis of Constitution and Illness 


Section 2 

Ayurvedic Analysis 







The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 



fist 


1 Mjdxrlxm lc ja J . 


























Section 2: Analysis 


Chapter 3: Analysis of Constitution and Illness 


The physician should examine the disease first, 
then the drug and finally the management. 
They should always proceed 
with prior knowledge. 

Charak Sarnhitd 

Chapter 3 
Analyzing 

Consitutions and Diseases 


Overview 

yurveda, according to Charak Sarnhitd, was 
t ■ a scientific and logical interpretation, in which 
tridosha theory was enumerated along with man¬ 
agement of Vayu, Pitta, and Kapha. Nature was 
seen as uniform, and rational knowledge was em¬ 
phasized over the supernatural. Symposia were 
held for practitioners to express opinions and to 
arrive at an accepted view of truth. Lord Atreya 
presided over the talks. 

Rather than analyze and name millions of body 
parts and diseases, Charak Sarnhitd holds that it is 
happiness and unhappiness that result in health and 

disease respectively The healthy or holistic per¬ 
son is termed Purusha, or eternal Divinity. The 
causes of illness are deha-manasa, or psychoso¬ 
matic reasons: mind affects body and body affects 
mind. Thus, the ‘partial’ view has no place and 
Sattwavajaya, or holistic psychotherapy, has its 
origins in the Ayurvedic science. 

Ayurveda then, is seen as a highly accurate and 
personalized method of analyzing people’s con¬ 
stitutions and illnesses; it recommends and pro¬ 
vides gentle, natural and effective therapies. 

Ayurveda relies totally on nature to heal, while 
Ayurvedic therapies only help in the healing pro¬ 
cess. Swabhavoparama (recession by nature) is the 
method of using herbs, diet, lifestyle, and other 
therapies (discussed in the next section) to return 
the mind and body back to its natural state of bal¬ 
ance. 


The nature of an illness is learned through five 
methods. 

& 


1. Cause ( nicldna) 

2. Premonitory or incubatory signs ( purvarupa ) 

3. Signs and symptoms ( rupa ) 

4. Diagnostic tests ( upashaya ) 

5. Pathology or stages of manifestation ( samprapti) 

1. Nidana or etiology (cause)—All diseases are 
caused by the aggravation of the doshas. 

2. Purvarupa (hidden or incubatory signs)—Signs 
and symptoms cannot be attributed to any specific 
dosha due to their mild nature. Two forms exist; 

a) Symptoms may occur due to one or more of 
the aggravated doshas and disappear when the 
disease manifests, or 

b) Symptoms that develop into the specific dis¬ 
ease. 

3. Rupa (signs and symptoms)—Manifestations of 
the disease are clearly observed. 

4. Upashaya (diagnostic tests)—When practitio¬ 
ners cannot determine the cause of the illness 
through the other methods they test with herbs, 
food, or habits. These therapies show whether they 
heal or aggravate the illness. 

5. Samprapti or pathogenesis (disease develop¬ 
ment) —Not merely symptoms or signs, this is the 
actual manifestation of disease. Five kinds of de¬ 
velopment exist: 

a) The varieties of a disease. 

b) The different aspects of the doshas causing the 
illness. 

c) Whether a disease is of primary or secondary 
nature. 

d) The severity of the illness, strong or weak (e.g., 
due to age, general health, etc.). 







The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


e) Time of digestion, day, or season when the dosha 
is predominant. 

Etiology: Cause of All Disease 

All diseases are caused by aggravation of the 
doshas. This aggravation of different doshas is 
caused by the intake of improper diet and leading 
an improper lifestyle ( Mithya Ahar Vihar). The 
three causes of illness are excessive, insufficient, 
or improper use of, 

1. The senses 

2. Actions 

3. Seasonal factors 

1. Unsuitable use of the senses : Unwholesome 
contact of the senses (taste, touch, sight, sound, 
and smell) with objects. For example, sound 
(hearing loud voices, noise pollution cause se¬ 
rious mind and health problems). Touch (con¬ 
tact of the skin with chemicals, hot objects, or 
overly cold objects). Sight (exposure to too 
much light, such as staring at the sun). 

2. Actions : Relate to body, speech, and mind. 
These include, conduct, urge, posture, concern, 
and emotions. Thoughts and decisions leading 
to harmful or unhealthy situations are said to 
be errors of the intellect. Spiritually speaking, 
the first intellectual error is to believe that any¬ 
one or anything is separate from oneself. The 
Ayurvedic texts say that this is the first cause 
of all diseases, the loss of faith in the Divine. 

3. Seasonal factors : Vayu accumulates during the 
dry or dehydrating heat of the summer 
(Grishma\ mid-May to mid-July). It becomes 
aggravated during the rainy season ( Varsha: 
mid-July to mid-September), which causes 
weakened digestion, acidic atmospheric con¬ 
ditions, and gas produced from the earth. 

Pitta accumulates during the rainy season due 

to the acidic conditions of the atmosphere and a 
weakened digestion. It is aggravated during autumn 
(,Sharat : mid- September to mid-November) when 
the heat returns (perhaps equivalent to Indian Sum¬ 
mer). This occurs after the cooling spell of the rainy 
season. 

Kapha accumulates during the cold season 
(Shishira: mid-January to mid-March) due to the 


cold and damp caused by the winds, clouds, and 
rain. It gets aggravated during the spring ( Vasant: 
mid-March to mid-May) when the warm weather 
liquefies the accumulating Kapha (from the cold 
season). 


Seasonal Increases of the Doshas 


Dosha 

Accumulate 

Aggravate 

Normalize 


Summer/ 

Grishina 

Rainy/ 

Varsha 

Autumn/ 

Sharat 

Vayu 

mid-May - 
mid-July 

mid-July - 
mid-Sept. 

mid-Sept. - 
mid-Nov. 


heat is dry, 
dehydrating 

weak 
digestion, 
acidic rain, 
earth gas 

sun and 

warmth 


Rainy/ 

Varsha 

Autumn/ 

Sharat 

Winter/ 

Hemanta 

Pitta 

mid-July - 
mid-Sept. 

mid-Sept. - 
mid-Nov. 

mid-Nov. - 

mid-Jan. 


weak 
digestion, 
acidic rain 

sun and 

heat 

returns 

cold, moist 


Cold/ 

Shishira 

Spring/ 

Vasant 

Summer/ 

Grishina 

Kapha 

mid-Jan. - 

mid-March 

mid-March 
- mid-May 

mid-May - 
mid-July 


cold, damp 

warmth, 

liquefies 

warm, dry 


Vavu Increasing Causes : Bitter, salty, and astrin¬ 
gent tastes, dry, light, cold foods, fasting, waiting 
longer than three or four hours between meals, 






















Section 2: Analysis 


Chapter 3: Analysis of Constitution and Illness 


suppression or premature initiation of the 13 natu¬ 
ral urges, staying awake late at night, prolonged 
high pitched speaking, excess emesis and purga¬ 
tion, sudden grief, fear, worry, or anxiety; exces¬ 
sive exercise or sexual intercourse; the end of the 
digestive process. 

Pitta Increasing Causes : Pungent, sour, and salty 
tastes, foods causing heat and burning sensations, 
anger, autumn, the middle of digestion, sun or heat 
exposure, exhaustion, eating with indigestion. 

Kapha Increasing Causes : Sweet, sour, and salty 
tastes, oils, heavy or indigestible foods, overeat¬ 
ing, cold foods, lack of exercise, excess sleeping, 
naps, inadequate emesis and purgation, eating be¬ 
fore hungry, in the spring, before noon and early 
night, the first stage of digestion. 

Factors Increasing All Doshas : Eating excessively, 
improper diet, uncooked, contaminated or incom¬ 
patible foods; spoiled food and drinks; dried veg¬ 
etables, raw root vegetables. Other factors include 
eating fried sesame seeds and molasses, mud, bar¬ 
ley beer, foul and dry meat, eating food out of sea¬ 
son; direct breeze, negative thoughts, living in 
mountain slopes. Malefic positioning of the plan¬ 
ets and constellations, improper administration of 
therapies, illegal actions, and being too inactive 
also increase all the doshas. 


Food Intake and Dosha Illness 

Improper quantity of food results in impairing 
strength, complexion, weight, distention, 
longevity, virility, and ojas. It afflicts the body, 
mind, intellect, and senses, causing harm to the 
dhcitus (tissues)—especially Vayu. Food taken 
in excess aggravates all three doshas. Obstructions 
are produced in the stomach and move 
through the upper and lower tracts, producing 
diseases according to one’s dosha. 

Vayu: Colic pain, constipation, malaise, dry 
mouth, fainting, giddiness, irregular digestive 
power, rigidity, hardening and contracting of ves¬ 
sels. 

dr 


Pitta: Fever, diarrhea, internal burning sensa¬ 
tion, thirst, intoxication, giddiness, and delirium. 

Kapha: Vomiting, anorexia, indigestion, cold 
fever, laziness, and heaviness. 


Disease Development: Six Stages 

Earlier, it was briefly mentioned that six stages 
of disease development exist. However, modem 
medical technology can only see the last two stages 
of any illness. Ayurveda offers insight into the ear¬ 
lier stages and enables those monitoring their health 
to take care of any small imbalances well before 
developing any serious illness. The six stages of 
disease development are: 

1. Accumulation : Illness begins in one of the three 
main dosha sites: stomach (Kapha), small intes¬ 
tine (Pitta), or the colon (Vayu). Excess Kapha in 
the stomach creates a blockage in the system that 
leads to lassitude, heaviness, pallor, bloating, and 
indigestion. Pitta accumulation creates burning 
sensations, fever, hyperacidity, bitter taste in the 
mouth, and anger. The collecting of Vayu creates 
gas, distention, constipation, dryness, fear, fatigue, 
insomnia, and the desire for warm things. 

The value of monitoring these experiences 
within one’s body and mind leads to the earliest 
detection of an imbalance, while it is still in its 
hidden or incubatory stages. 

2. Aggravation : As the imbalanced elements (hu¬ 
mors) continue to increase, the symptoms men¬ 
tioned above become more aggravated and will be 
noticed in other parts of the body as well. Kapha 
aggravation causes a loss of appetite, indigestion, 
nausea, excess saliva, heaviness in the heart and 
head, and oversleeping. The aggravated Pitta ex¬ 
perience is one of increased acidity, burning sen¬ 
sations in the abdomen, lowered vitality, or insom¬ 
nia. Vayu aggravation results in pain and spasm in 
the abdomen, gas and rumbling in the bowels, and 
light-headedness. 

3. Overflow : Once the origin site is full with the 
excess humor (element), it will begin to overflow 











The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


into the rest of the body using different channels 
of transportation. The doshas begin to overflow 
into the GI tract, then join with the circulating 
plasma and blood. During circulation the humors 
then begin to seep into the organs, dhcitus (tissues), 
and malas (waste). Simultaneously, symptoms at 
the origin site continue to grow worse. 

4. Moving and localization at a distant site : The 
humors will move to wherever a weak site exists 
in the body. This is where and when specific dis¬ 
eases begin to develop. For example, a Vayu ill¬ 
ness could move to the bones and begin to create 
arthritis. If the duodenum is weak, humors deposit 
themselves there and create an ulcer (usually a Pitta 
condition). Kapha moves to organs like the lungs 
when weakened. Healing is still simple, even at 
this fourth stage of illness. 

5. Manifestation : This is the first stage of the de¬ 
velopment of illness for which Western science can 
detect signs of disease. Here, diseases become fully 
developed, showing signs of clinical features. 
Names are given to imbalances of the humors, such 
as cancer, bronchitis, arthritis, etc. 


ness and the healing process through the three paths 
that disease travels. 

Inner : This is the digestive tract involving diseases 
of the GI tract. These diseases are easy to heal be¬ 
cause toxins are expelled through the tract. Dis¬ 
eases of the inner path include fever, cough, hic¬ 
cups, enlarged abdomen or spleen, internal edema, 
vomiting, and hard stools. 

Outer : This path refers to the plasma/skin, blood, 
and superficial tissues. Toxic blood and skin dis¬ 
eases are harder to heal because removing an ill¬ 
ness from the tissue is more difficult. Symptoms 
include abdominal and other malignant tumors, 
edema, and hemorrhoids. 

Central : This path refers to muscle, fat, bone, mar¬ 
row, and deeper nerve tissues. This is the most 
delicate area of the body, affecting the heart, head, 
bone joints, and urinary bladder. The most diffi¬ 
cult diseases develop here, such as cancer or ar¬ 
thritis. These diseases develop between the inner 
and outer paths. 


6. Distinction/Chronic Complications : In this last 
stage, the symptoms become clear enough so that 
the elemental cause may be determined. For ex¬ 
ample, Vayu asthma will cause dry skin, constipa¬ 
tion, anxiety, attacks at dawn, and the desiring of 
warmth. Pitta asthma will show yellow phlegm, 
fever, sweating, and attacks at noon and midnight. 
Asthma brought on by Kapha will create white 
phlegm, water in the lungs, and attacks during the 
morning and evening. Some practitioners de¬ 
scribe this stage as the chronic phase of develop¬ 
ment. For example, if one develops an inflamma¬ 
tion or abscess in stage five, in stage six, compli¬ 
cations set in, and the abscess may burst and be¬ 
come a chronic ulcer. 


Signs and Symptoms of Disease, by Dosha 

Excess Vayu : Drooping, dilation, loss of sensation, 
and weakness; continuous, cutting, pricking, crush¬ 
ing, or splitting pain; obstruction, contraction, or 
constriction; twisting, tingling, thirst, tremors, 
roughness, dryness, throbbing, curvatures, gas, 
winding, stiffness, or rigidity; astringent taste in 
mouth, blue/crimson discoloration, partial vacu¬ 
ums in bodily liquids. 

Excess Pitta : Burning sensation, reddish discolora¬ 
tion, heat, high digestive fire, pus, ulcers, perspi¬ 
ration, moistness, debility, fainting, toxicity, bitter 
and sour tastes in the mouth, oozing, fungus. 


Three Disease Pathways 

In our consideration of the Ayurvedic view of 
the body, we also learn of the classification of ill- 


Excess Kapha : Oiliness, hardness, itching irrita¬ 
tions, cold, heaviness, obstructions, toxic or mu¬ 
cus coatings inside the srotas (channels), loss of 
movement, swelling, edema, indigestion, excessive 


& A 














Section 2: Analysis 


Chapter 3: Analysis of Constitution and Illness 


sleep, whitish complexion, sweet and salty tastes 
in the mouth. 


Three Kinds of Diseases 

All diseases arise from bad actions occurring 
in one’s 

1. Present life (finding a specific cause of the ill¬ 
ness). These are healed with therapies of the op¬ 
posite nature. 

2. Past lives (no apparent cause for an illness). 
These are healed after the action has worked itself 
out. 

3. A combination of both (diseases that suddenly 
manifest as terrible, profound and severe). These 
require a combination of therapies and the cessa¬ 
tion of harmful activities. 

Diseases are either primary (initial symptoms) 
or secondary (complications arising later). If the 
secondary complications of the doshas do not sub¬ 
side when the primary causes are healed, additional 
therapies must be administered. 


Analysis of Factors 

For healing to occur, the practitioner carefully 
studies and decides the condition of the vitiated 
tissues ( dhcitus ) and wastes ( malas ), patient’s habi¬ 
tat, strength, and digestive power. He needs to learn 
the constitution, age, mind, lifestyle, diet, the stage 
of the disease, and the season, before recommend¬ 
ing the appropriate therapy. (Symptoms may ap¬ 
pear mild or severe, depending upon the patient’s 
total strength (mental and physical). Thus, the prac¬ 
titioner needs to make a careful and complete 
analysis). 

After determining individual body type and the 
elemental cause and development of illness, the 
next step is to analyze the patient’s constitution 
and illness (prakriti and vikriti respectively). 


The Doshas - 

Deciding the Cause of Disease: 

General Approach 

The practitioner has several methods of learn¬ 
ing the prakriti (constitution) and the vikriti (ill¬ 
ness) of patients: 

1. Authoritative Instruction 

2. Direct Observation 
3.Inference 

1. Authoritative Instruction comes from a teacher 
who has had much experience in determining the 
cause and nature of constitutions and illness. 

2. Observation includes visual analysis of the face, 
finger nails, eyes, tongue, urine, stool, complex¬ 
ion, and shape; it also includes auditory observa¬ 
tions of the tone of voice, listening for intestinal 
gurgling, cracking sounds of bones and fingers, 
coughing or hiccups, as well as by palpation, most 
notably the evaluation of the pulse. By noticing 
certain characteristics, the practitioner begins to 
learn the dosha or prakriti (constitution) and the 
dosha imbalance that may be causing the illness 
(vikriti). 

Ayurvedic observation is a threefold approach: 
questioning, observing, and palpating (touch). To 
gain information that is not readily observable, the 
practitioner addresses questions directly to the 
patient and also asks the patient to complete a ques¬ 
tionnaire or self-test (see appendix 2). 

Discussion with the patient helps reveal the 
prakriti and vikriti. Discussing one’s family and 
personal health history, and learning of the patient’s 
symptoms round out the consultation. 

Questionnaires are self-tests which ask a se¬ 
ries of mental and physical questions that help the 
practitioner decide a person’s mental and physical 
dosha and illness. 

3. Inference Through reasoning the practitioner 
gains indirect knowledge about the state of vari¬ 
ous health conditions. The situations learned 
through inference are summarized in the follow¬ 
ing table: 












The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Client Knowledge Through Inference 


Condition 

Inferred From 

agni (digestive fire) 

digestive power 

strength 

exercise capacity 

sensory abilities 

capacity to correctly 
perceive 

mental abilities 

understands 

instructions 

mental guna 
(sattwa,rajas, tamas) 

expression (e.g. gentle, 
harsh, angry) 

anger 

revengeful 

grief 

sorrowful 

fear 

apprehension 

joy 

happy mood 

pleasure 

satisfied face & eyes 

courage 

resolute mind 

mental stability 

expressing balance, 
lack of mistakes 

desire 

amount of requests the 
client makes 

intelligence 

comprehension of 
spiritual discussion 

deception 

subsequent actions 


Only after a careful analysis of all three areas— 
that is, considering the cumulative information, — 
does a practitioner determine the pmkriti (consti¬ 
tution) and vikriti (illness). The practitioner would 
not make quick judgments based on only one or 
two signs. Often people have characteristics of all 
three doshas, so the practitioner finds the one or 
two doshas that predominate. Sometimes a patient 
is tridoshic, or having equal parts of all three 
doshas. [It is not important what dosha a person is 


(i.e., there is no preferred constitution). What is 
important is that one’s constitution is balanced.] 

By observing, listening, and questioning, the 
practitioner learns of one’s constitution and illness. 
Below are general guidelines that show which 
dosha is in excess. Sometimes the patient may use 
words like “dry,” “hot,” or “lazy,” which alerts the 
practitioner to the dosha being deranged. 

Observation 

Face : The face offers various clues to help the 
practitioner determine the disorder. A thin facial 
structure is an indication of a Vayu prakriti.A wide 
structure is more of a Kapha constitution. Strong 
muscular or moderate facial structure suggests Pitta 
dosha. The picture of a face (below) shows which 
organs may be imbalanced or diseased. 


FACE ANALYSIS 


Mouth : Vayu excess—foul and smelly, Pitta 
excess—bitter, Kapha excess —sweet, Tridoshic 
excess—all symptoms. 

Tongue : The tongue also offers many signs 
about health. Its size, shape, and coating help the 
practitioner decide the humor causing the illness. 

Coating: Suggests dma or toxin in the system. 
When only a little coating is on the tongue, the 
person is generally healthy. A thick, white coating 
indicates dma (Kapha). Thick, greasy, yellow, or 
inflamed tongues suggest dma fermentation (Pitta). 


Liver Line 

(repressed anger) 

Eye rings 

(kidney disorders) 



Worry Lines 

(Vayu excess) 

Spleen Line 





























Section 2: Analysis 


Chapter 3: Analysis of Constitution and Illness 


If a coating is on the front third of the tongue, 
this indicates Kapha toxins ( ama ), the middle third 
shows Pitta ama, and the back third suggests Vayu 
ama. Should the coating be on two thirds of the 
tongue, or on the entire tongue, then there is a dual 
dosha or tridoslia ama excess. 

Below is a diagram of a tongue, with the corre¬ 
sponding areas from which organ health can be 
detected. 



Color: A blackish brown color shows Vayu dis¬ 
orders. Yellow, green or reddish suggests Pitta prob¬ 
lems in the liver or gall bladder. Kapha problems 
are revealed by a whitish color. Blue may suggest 
heart problems, blue or purple would indicate stag¬ 
nation or liver disorders. Vayu problems yield a 
dull or pale color. Kapha conditions are pale col¬ 
ored. 

Size: Vayu doshas have a small, long, thin, or 
trembling tongue. Pitta doshas have a medium 
tongue with a sharp tip. Kapha people have large, 
thick, round tongues with thick lips. 

Marks: Teeth-like marks around the front arc/ 
edge of the tongue means that nutrients are not 
being absorbed. 

A line down the middle of the tongue suggests 
immune problems. Cracks in the tongue show Vayu 
imbalances. 


Brushing or scraping the tongue with a tooth¬ 
brush or spoon removes excess mucus. This pro¬ 
cess releases repressed emotions as well. 

The diagram below shows where on the tongue 
the doshas are reflected. 



Eyes : The eyes also help show an individual’s 
dosha. Generally, Vayu eyes are small and un¬ 
steady. Pitta eyes are sharp and piercing, and red¬ 
dish or bloodshot. Large, wide and white eyes sug¬ 
gest Kapha dosha. Healthy eyes are serene, cheer¬ 
ful, and beautiful. 



Pitta 
























The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Nails : The nails also help reveal one’s dosha and 
illness. Vayu nails are thin, brittle, and cracking. 
Biting the nails shows Vayu nervousness. Lines in 
the nail show malabsorption. Pitta nails are me¬ 
dium in size and pinkish in color. Wide, strong, 
white colored nails suggest Kapha dosha. 



Pitta 


Kapha 



Small white spots on the nails reveal calcium 
or zinc deficiencies, or calcium deposits in certain 
organs. Spots on the ring finger suggest calcium 
deposit in the kidney. If the spots are on the middle 
finger nail the deposit is in the small intestine. 
When spots are on the index finger, the deposits 
are in the lungs. See the diagram below. 



Lips : Thin, dry, or cracked lips are signs of Vayu 
excesses. Medium sized lips reveal a Pitta dosha. 
Wide, thick lips suggest a Kapha dosha. 


Voice : Deep tonal voices are characteristic of 
Kaphas. A moderate speaker, with a tendency to¬ 
wards arguing, suggests a Pitta person. A person 
with a low, weak voice indicates a Vayu individual. 


Pulse Analysis 

A healthy pulse is thick and strong 
A sick pulse is thick and dull, or sluggish 
- Nadiprakasham : Ch. 2 verse 4 

Pulse Analysis : This is a science in itself. Although 
it takes many years to become proficient in this 
practice, pulse reading offers many insights, in¬ 
cluding dosha knowledge, general health, and or¬ 
gan health. Since pulse reading requires much skill, 
one may decide the prakriti (constitution) and 
vikriti (illness) without even using pulse analysis. 

Two Ayurvedic texts deal exclusively with the 
intricacies of pulse analysis: Ncidivijhanam (mean¬ 
ing the science or knowledge of pulse diagnosis), 
by Maharishi Kanada (circa7thcentury B.C.), and 
Nadiprakasham by Shankar Sen (19th-20th Cen¬ 
tury AD). The basic belief is that the pulse reveals 
different qualities, rates, and temperatures, and 
appears stronger in different positions for each 
dosha. 

Pulse analysis takes a long time to master, and 
many factors may cause inaccurate readings, so it 
is advised not to take pulses under certain condi¬ 
tions. 


Time of Taking Pulse : The pulse is read or ana¬ 
lyzed when the patient and practitioner are at rest. 
Nadiprakasham suggests taking the pulse in the 
morning, when the pulse is cool (afternoon pulse 
is hot; evening pulse is fast). The ideal constitu¬ 
tion (dosha) pulse is read upon waking in the morn¬ 
ing (before 10:00 a.m.), after expelling stool and 
urine, and before eating. 


Constitution Pulse: 6:00 - 10:00 a.m. 
Illness (Imbalance) Pulse: 10:00 a.m. on. 























Section 2: Analysis 


Chapter 3: Analysis of Constitution and Illness 


Finding the Pulse 

Two schools of thought exist on this subject. 
The author of Nadivijnanam suggests that the in¬ 
dex finger be placed on the radial pulse of the wrist, 
just under the thumb (see the diagram below). The 
middle finger is placed just under the index finger 
(but not resting on the bony protrusion [radial tu¬ 
bercle]), and the ring finger is placed closest to the 
elbow. 

II? II 

Shrangushthamule karayoh 
padayorgalphadashatah I 
kapalaparshvayoh shadbhyo nadibhyo 
vyadhinirnayah II verse ill 
Nadivijnanam 


Bony protrusion 



A second school suggests the index finger 
should be placed on the radial pulse below the flex 
in the wrist (i.e., two finger widths below the thumb 
root). As before, the other two fingers are posi¬ 
tioned below it. In both cases, finger pressure on 
the wrist is applied lightly. 

Some suggest taking the pulse of the right hand 
for men, and the left hand for women (except when 
they have a fever). Others suggest checking both 
pulses. When taking one’s own pulse, males use 
their left hand and take the right pulse. Females 
take the left-hand pulse with their right hand. 


The practitioner’s left palm supports the 
patient’s elbow, with the right hand fingers press¬ 
ing the artery. The patient’s elbow and wrist are 
slightly bent. Finger pad tops are soft and can eas¬ 
ily read the pulses. Fingers are placed between the 
wide bone below the thumb and the thin bones (in 
the middle of the wrist). 



Vayu pulse is now beginning 
just below the tubercle. 

Many factors may cause inaccurate readings, 
so it is advised not to take pulses under certain 
conditions. 


Accurate Pulse Taking 

Take Pulse 

Do Not Take Pulse 

between meals 

after meals 

when rested 

after exercise or 
strenuous work 

after bathroom 

when nature calls 


with fever 

during or after bath 

after sunbathing 

after sex 

after massage 

while sitting near fire 


Finding the pulse of Vayu persons may be hard 
due to the weakness of their pulse. Kapha pulses 
may also be difficult to find or read because of 
excess fat or thick s ki n. The pulse under the ring 
































The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


finger may also be difficult to find because the pulse 
moves deeper into the arm as it gets farther away 
from the wrist. [Other positions to find the pulse 
include at the lower ankles and at the temples.] 
Although the pulse becomes slower as one gets 
older, the general rule in deciding doshas is: 


Pulse Rate 


Doshas 

Pulses 

Vayu 

80 - 100 

Pitta 

70 - 80 

Kaha 

60-70 


Pulse Quality 

A most interesting and unusual method to learn 
the constitution {prakriti ) or present imbalance 
(■vikriti) is the quality of the pulse. When the doshas 
are aggravated, the pulse expresses itself in vari¬ 
ous ways. 

Vayu pulses have the personality or quality of a 
snake, feeling quick, thin, thready, irregular, and 
crooked, with symptoms of nervousness, indiges¬ 
tion, Vayu fevers. 

Pitta pulses feel like a frog: bounding or jumpy, 
regular (or if irregular, it has a consistent pattern), 
with symptoms of heat, insomnia, diarrhea, ver¬ 
tigo, hypertension, eye, or skin problems. When 
the pulse is also felt as wiry, hard, stiff, and fast, 
there are corresponding symptoms of Pitta asthma, 
rheumatism, gout, chronic headaches, and bleed¬ 
ing disorders. 

Kapha pulses are swan-like: regal, slow, and con¬ 
stant. Some people say it is a warm pulse, while 
others say it is cold. Related symptoms are cough¬ 
ing, melancholy, constipation, bronchial disorders, 
and overweight. 

Vdyu/Pitta pulses alternate between snake and frog 
qualities. The pulse feels knotty, restless, intermit¬ 


tent, imperceptible, thick, and thin. Health issues 
include thirst, vertigo, headaches, suppressed urine, 
extremity pain, and heat. 

Pitta/Vayu pulses feel jumpy and hard, with heat 
and blood related symptoms being predominant. 
Vdyu/Kapha pulses alternate between snake and 
swan qualities, weak and forceful, vanishing, hol¬ 
low, slippery, and irregular qualities. Symptoms 
include chills, extremity pain, frequent urination, 
cough, insomnia, drowsiness, feeling slow and fast, 
soft and expanded. Sometimes chronic complaints 
arise around the new and full moon. 

KaphaAfgyu pulses feel soft and slow. 
Pitta/Kapha pulses alternate between frog and 
swan qualities, with symptoms of both fire and 
water excesses. Pitta concerns are more aggravated. 
Kapha/Pitta pulses alternate between swan and 
frog qualities, with predominantly Kapha symp¬ 
toms, and secondary Pitta complaints. 

Tridoshic (all three doshas) pulses will show all 
three qualities: snake, frog, and swan. Pulse move¬ 
ments are periodic, quick, jumpy, and slow. 
Healthy pulse has no signs of dullness. In the morn¬ 
ing the pulse feels cool and steady, at noon it feels 
warm. The pulse moves quickly in the evening. 
These three pulses indicate the person has been 
healthy for a long while and will continue to be 
healthy for some time to come. 


Pulse-Dosha Detection 

One method is to lightly place fingers on the 
pulse positions until a pulse is first felt under one 
finger. If the pulse if first noticed under the index 
finger, this shows a Vayu dosha (before 10 a.m.) 
or Vayu imbalance (after 10 a.m.). The middle fin¬ 
ger suggests a Pitta dosha or Pitta imbalance. A 
Kapha dosha pulse is first felt under the ring fin¬ 
ger. Sometimes this method is inaccurate because 
of the pulse being more easily felt closer to the 
wrist. 

Some practitioners believe that whichever fin¬ 
ger the pulse is first felt (i.e., indcx/Vayu, middle/ 
Pitta, ring/Kapha) will tell whether an illness is 
located in a Vayu, Pitta, or Kapha organ (or the 
prakriti before 10 a.m.). Should the pulse be felt 





















Section 2: Analysis 


Chapter 3: Analysis of Constitution and Illness 


under two fingers simultaneously, then both doshas 
are imbalanced (or a dual -dosha prakriti before 
10 a.m.). Sometimes one may feel the pulse under 
one or two lingers strongly and yet feel a mild pulse 
under the second or third finger. The fainter pulses 
suggest a slight imbalance of the corresponding 
dosha. 

For example, a pulse is first felt under the in¬ 
dex finger and then a milder pulse is felt under the 
middle finger. This shows a main Vayu imbalance, 
with a secondary Pitta disorder. If the pulse is felt 
under all three fingers (either strongly or mildly), 
then all the doshas are imbalanced. 

Pulse quality, position, and rate are the three 
best pulse methods to decide one’s dosha. 


After 10:00 a.m. one only learns the vikriti 
(current imbalance or disease) from both the 
quality and position of the pulse - 
or must take the deepest level pulse 
(i.e. occluding the pulse, then gradually 
releasing pressure until the pulse is first felt). 


The practitioner takes the pulse from the thumb 
side of the client (radial side), not reaching across 
from the pinky side (ulnar side). 


Pulse Qualities Signs for Health and Disease 

Abscess- agitated, fiery 

Acidity- crooked, shaky, wide, slippery, slow 

Anemia- faint, felt at intervals 

Anger- accelerated 

Appetite (loss of)- steady, slow, hard, mild 
Asthma- thin, steady, accelerated, hard, speedy, 
intense, felt under all three fingers, hollow 
Bile- hot 

Boils- (hard) bilious 

Colic- (pulse according to the doshas ) (with ab 
dominal worms)- expanded 
Convulsions- wide and rapid (hysterical)- crooked 
and rapid 

Constipation- frog, strong 

Cough- trembling, thin, restless, slow, hot, swan 


Deafness- quick and spreading 
Diabetes- knotty 

(mellitus)- thin 

(insipidus)- Vayu: Crooked, thin. 

Pitta: Fast. 

Kapha: Slow 

Diarrhea (chronic)- [after evacuations] gentle, 
weak. 

Vayu: Crooked. 

Pitta: Fast. 

Kapha: mild 
Dysentery- 

(Vayu)- crooked 
(Pitta)- restless 

(Kapha)- cold, slow, swan-like 
(with mucus)- wide, inert, dull 
(two doshas) both pulses, respectively 
(caused by three doshas) disappears, or is 
imperceptible 

(after bowel evacuation) energy-less 
Dysmenorrhea- steady, quick 
Edema- sometimes weak, thin, cold, stopping 
Eye Diseases- hard, slow, slippery, crooked 
Fainting- lightning-like 
Fear- weak 

Healthy/Nourished- rises or jumps upward, pure, 
stays in place, steady, not slow, 

Feces (suppression)- hard, heavy, or frog 
Fever- heated 

Full-blooded- slightly hot and heavy 
Fistula-in-ano- dull Kapha pulse 
Gonorrhea- thin, knotty, inert; pulse at joint 
Good Digestion- soft, mild, quick, not dull 
Gout (acute)- slow, crooked, hard, mild 
Headaches- weak, changeable 
Heart diseases- swan 
Hemorrhage- hard, slow 

Hemorrhoids- (differs according to the dosha de 
ranged) 

Hernia- rises and jumps 
Hiccup- much trembling and fast 
Hoarse/loss of voice- thready, grave, twisting, 
tricky, thin, hard, inert 
Hungry- restless, unsteady, wavering 
Hysteria- weak, fast 

Indigestion- slow, hard, or inert; cool; swan-like 
(Chronic)- under nourished, slow 


& A 






The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Insanity- speedy and turning, crooked 
Jaundice- weak, splitting, and expanded 
Mucus- wide, hot 

Negative Thoughts (evil spirits)- hot, curved 
Nose Diseases- agitated, slowed 
Obesity- thick, slow 

Parasites- sometimes disappears, is slow, or fast 
Phlegm- thick and slow 
Pregnant- weak, slow 
Rheumatism- thin, fast 
Satiated- steady and slow 
Sciatica- wide, crooked, slow 
Sex (afterwards)- weak and accelerated (passion- 
deranged 

Sinus- agitated, fiery 

Spleen enlargement- trembling, restless, and be 
coming speedy 

Suppression of urges (repeatedly)- hard, heavy 
Thirst- leech-like 
Thyroid (enlarged)- wide, slow 
(hypo)- slow 

Toxic blood (bile)- slow, hard, and mild 
Tumor (abdominal)- restless, gyrates, quick 
(throat)- wide, slow, trembling 
Urine (suppressing or discharge pain)- heavy, hard, 
urgent 

stones- frog, low, crooked 
inability (obstruction)- frog 
other diseases- thin, knotty, inert 
Vayu disorders- thin and fast 
Vomiting- thick, slowed, disappears (elephant and 
swan-like) 

Wasting- weak or differing movements 



Nature of Pulse Depending Upon Diet Intake 
Foods and Qualities 


Food 

Pulse 

Oils 

thick, wide 

Sweets 

wide, frog-like 

Banana 

snake/frog 

Fried Foods 

snake/frog 

Fasting 

weak, accelerated 

Meat 

wide, hard, jumps up 

Milk 

slow 

Molasses 

snake/frog 

Fiquids 

hard 

Dry Foods 

snake/frog 

Hard Foods 

flowing (liquid or soft) 

Small Foods 

knotty, separate 

Nourishing 

developed 


6 Tastes 

Pulse 

Sweet 

swan 

Sour 

bird 

Salty 

speedy, straight 

Hot/Acidic 

frog, warm, light 

Bitter 

worm 

Astringents 

hard, weak 

Multiple tastes 

several pulses 


Onset of Fevers 

Depending upon the time and dosha causing 
fever, the pulse yields different readings. 

Vayu- generally a slow, weak pulse, especially 
when beginning during times of 





























Section 2: Analysis 


Chapter 3: Analysis of Constitution and Illness 


(accumulation)- slow, weak [occurring during 
digestion, in the summer, and at noon, and mid¬ 
night], 

(excess)- heavy, hard, quick [after digestion, in 
the afternoon, end of night, and in the rainy sea¬ 
son]. 

Pitta- (accumulating)- clearly felt under all three 
fingers, and quickens its pace [after meals, morn¬ 
ing, evening, and during the rainy season]. 

(excess)- hard, quick, bursting pulse [occurs 
while digesting, at noon and midnight, and in au¬ 
tumn] . 

Kapha- (accumulating or in excess)- weak, thin, 
thready, cold [during digestion, evening, the end 
of night, in autumn and in winter]. 

Vayu/Pitta Fever- thick, hard, undulating. 
Vayu/Kapha Fever- slow and hot. 

Vayu/Kapha Fever- dry and quick. 

Pitta/Kapha- slow, thready, weak, sometimes cool, 
sometimes cold and slow. 

Tridoshic Fever- the symptoms described above 
appear during their respective periods of 
excess. 

Pulse Before Fever- a short period that exhibits a 
frog-like pulse. 

Intermittent Fever- the pulse is felt at the root of 
the thumb or at its side, on alternating days. 
When fevers appear every three or four 
days, the pulse is hot, gyrating, and reced 
ing. 

Fever with Hot and Sour Foods- raises the pulse 
rate. 


Pulses That Determine Causal Dosha 

Vayu Fever with Air Accumulation: Soft, thin, 
steady, slow, and faint. 

Vayu Fever with Air Excess: Large, hard, and rapid. 

Pitta Fever with Fire Accumulation: Full, straight, 
felt under all three fingers, and quick. 

Pitta Fever with Fire Excess: Hard, fast, piercing, 
and pulsing upwards. 


Kapha Fever with Kapha Accumulation: Hard, 
slow, and cool 

Kapha Fever with Kapha Excess: Thread-like, 
slow, and cool. 

Vayu=Pitta Fever: Unsteady, wavy, thick, and hard. 
Vayu/Kapha Fever: Slightly warm, and slow. 
Kapha/Vayu Fever: Hard and rough. 

Pitta=Kapha Fever: Thin, cool, and steady. 

Fever Caused by Negative Thoughts (Spirits): 
Speedy, flowing, and hot. 

If a person’s pulse is continuously 
cool and slow in the morning, 
hot at noon, and fast in the evening, 

It is a healthy pulse. 


Organ Pulses 

Pulses at the three wrist positions also reveal 
the health of 12 different body organs. This infor¬ 
mation can be found by taking the pulse at a light 
and deep level. This is possible because certain 
“meridian” or energy lines connect the organ en¬ 
ergy currents to corresponding wrist positions. 
Superficial or light pulses generally relate to the 
hollow organs, while the deep positions mostly 
reveal the solid organs. 

The same three fingers and wrist positions are 
used as before, except the organ pulses are taken 
on both wrists. [Of the two finger placement sys¬ 
tems described earlier, i.e., just under the thumb 
joint and under the bone, the latter positioning is 
used for taking the organ pulse.] The practitioner 
first gets a feel for the general pulse by using all 
three fingers. Then, they press one finger to an or¬ 
gan pulse site. The two pulses (general and spe¬ 
cific) are then compared for strength (i.e., decid¬ 
ing if the organ pulse is stronger or weaker than 
the general pulse). Practitioners can even deter¬ 
mine conditions such as noting smoke in the lungs. 
This may reveal that the person is a cigarette 
smoker. Fire organ positions, like the liver, spleen, 
and gall bladder can feel hot or electric when Pitta 
is excessive in these organs. The urinary bladder 
pulse may reflect an urgency or fullness if the blad- 


& A 





The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


der is full. This would suggest the need for per¬ 
sons to attend to nature’s call. 

Some practitioners use the right hand at super¬ 
ficial and deep positions to gain spiritual insights 
about the patient. (An approach used by some prac¬ 
titioners is mentally to ask the “pulse” what it is 
that the patient needs to hear right now. The first 
thought entering their head thereafter is the an¬ 
swer.) It is said that the various pulse methods take 
10-15 years to master. 

Again, no one indication is used by itself when 
deciding the health of an organ. Only after assess¬ 
ing the total person does the practitioner reach a 
decision as to the patient’s prakriti and vikriti. The 
practitioner looks at all the mental and physical 
traits found through observation, questionnaire, and 
discussion. 


Organ Pulse Positions 


Left Hand 

Position 

Light 

Deep 

1st 

small intestine 

heart 

2nd 

stomach 

spleen 

3rd 

urinary 

bladder kidney 

Right Hand 

Position 

Light 

Deep 

1st 

colon 

lungs 

2nd 

gall bladder 

liver 

3rd 

pericardium 

spiritual pulse 


A more advanced determination of the organ 
pulse analysis also exists. The index, middle, and 
ring fingers relate to Vayu, Pitta, and Kapha doshas 
respectively. The upper, middle, and lower areas 
of each finger tip show which dosha is imbalancing 
which organ. 

The index finger pressing at the superficial po¬ 
sition of the right hand (colon) is such an example. 
If the pulse is felt in the middle of the index finger, 
a Pitta imbalance exists in the colon. If the pulse is 
felt on the upper portion of the index finger, Vayu 
is causing the disorder. Colon disorders caused by 
Kapha are noted in the pulse felt at the lower por¬ 
tion of the index finger. Should the pulse be felt at 


two areas (e.g., the upper and middle of the finger 
tip), then two doshas are causing the excess. 

Questionnaire 

Another Ayurvedic dosha analysis tool is a self¬ 
test filled out by the patient. The self-test ques¬ 
tions reflect the patient’s total life span (not just 
the newor current symptoms caused that day, week, 
or year). Some practitioners offer two different 
questionnaires, one to learn the prakriti and one to 
learn about the cause of the illness {vikriti). (Dur¬ 
ing consultation discussions the current illness 
{vikriti) is discussed.) 

To find out one’s dosha, questions are asked 
about the patient’s mind, body, and emotional well 
being. Below is a sample of the questions that of¬ 
fer insight into the patient’s prakriti (nature). 

[Note: V stands for Vayu, P stands for Pitta, 
and K stands for Kapha.] After checking the cat¬ 
egory that best describes one’s total life experi¬ 
ences, the practitioner totals the number for each 
category V, P, K. The result will decide the dosha. 
For example, if there are 10-V, 20- P, and 30- K, 
the person is a Kapha dosha. If the sum is 25-V, 
25-P and 10- K, the person is Vayu/Pitta dosha. If 
the sum is 20-V, 20-P, and 20-K, the person is 
Tridoshic. Separate totals for the mental and physi¬ 
cal questions reveal any differences between the 
doshas of the mind and body. 


Outer Conditions 

Frame: 

V- tall or short, thin, bony 

P- medium, average development 

K- wide, stocky, stout, big, well-developed body 

Weight: 

V- low, protruding veins and bones, can’t keep 
weight on; may be heavy but with fluctu 
ating weight and spongy tissues. 

P- moderate, muscular; excess red meat and greasy 
foods add excess weight. 

K- heavy, hard to keep weight off, obesity 




















Section 2: Analysis 


Chapter 3: Analysis of Constitution and Illness 


Head: 

V- thin, long, small, unsteady, stiff necks 
P- moderate 

K- stocky, large, square-ish, steady 

Hair: 

V- curly, brown, dry, coarse, sparse, full bodied 
P- straight, blond or reddish, early gray or bald, 
soft, fine 

K- oily, thick, very wavy, dark brown or black, 
lustrous, abundant 

Forehead: 

V- small, wrinkles 
P- moderate with folds 
K- large and broad 

Face: 

V- long, thin, wrinkled, small, dull 
P- moderate, sharply contoured 
K- large, round, fat, pale, softly contoured 

Skin: 

V- thin, cold, rough, cracked, dry, prominent veins 
P- warm, pink, freckles, acne, moles, moist, rashes, 
easy sunburn, delicate, sensitive 
K- thick, cold, smooth, white, soft, moist, oily, 
edema, fatty 

Complexion: 

V- dull, darkish brown, lackluster 
P- flushed, reddish, freckled, glowing, discolora¬ 
tion 

K- pale, whitish 

Eyes, Lashes, and Brows: 

V- small, dry, brown, unsteady 
P- medium, red, thin, green, piercing, light sensi¬ 
tive 

K- wide, oily, white, attractive, prominent, cry 
easily, discharge in eyes, steady but dull 
focus 

Nose: 

V- thin, long, and pointed, small, dry, crooked 
P- average, sharp, and pointed 
K- thick, firm, big, oily 


* Nose, eyes, and complexion will vary depend¬ 
ing on racial/cultural characteristics. 

Lips: 

V- thin, small, dry, unsteady, darkish, biting 
P- medium, soft, red 

K- large, thick, oily, smooth, firm, attractive 

Teeth/Gums: (varies according to hygiene) 

V- thin, small, dry, rough, crooked, spaces, buck 
teeth, receding gums 
P- medium, soft pink, gums bleed easily 
K- large, white, attractive, thick, soft pink, oily 

Neck: 

V- thin, long, loose tendons 
P- moderate 
K- large, thick, square 

Shoulders: 

V- small, thin, flat, hunched 
P- medium 
K- broad, thick, firm 

Frame: 

V- small, thin bones 
P- average 
K-large bones 

Upper Torso: 

V- small, thin, narrow, underdeveloped, doesn’t 
gain weight easily 
P- moderate, wiry 

K- large, broad, well developed, overdeveloped, 
gain weight easily 

Arms: 

V- small, thin, long, low development, bony el 
bows 

P- moderate, wiry 

K- large, thick, round, well developed, fleshy 

Hands: 

V- small, narrow, dry, rough, cold, unsteady, fis¬ 
sured, lines, bony knuckles 
P- moderate, warm, pink 
K- large, thick, cool, firm, oily, square, unlined 





The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Legs: 

V- very short or long legs, thin, bony knees, runs 
and walks a lot, walking coordination is 
unsteady 
P- average 

K- large, stocky, can stand for long periods 

Thighs: 

V- thin, narrow 
P- moderate 

K- fat, round, well developed, cellulitis 
Calves: 

V- small, tight, hard 
P- soft, loose 
K- firm, shapely 

Feet: 

V- small, thin, rough, long, dry, unsteady, fissured, 
need to be oiled daily 

P- moderate, soft pink, good circulation and com¬ 
plexion 

K- large, thick, firm 

Joints: 

V- small, thin, dry, unsteady, cracking, prominent 
P- moderate, loose, soft 
K- large, thick, well built 

Nails: (mineral absorption) 

V- small, thin, dry, rough, cracked, fissured, dark 

P- medium, soft, pink 

K- large, thick, white, smooth, oily, firm 

Sweat/Odor: (vegetarians sweat less than meat 
eaters do) 

V- odorless, scanty 

P- strong smell, profuse, hot 

K- pleasant smell, moderate when exercising, cold 

Feces: 

V- scanty, dry, hard, painful, or difficult, gas, con¬ 
stipation 

P- abundant, loose, yellowish, burning diarrhea 
K- moderate, solid, pale, mucus in stool 
* Pitta persons with fevers get constipation. Kaphas 
may get constipation but stool is not hard. 


Urine: 

V- scanty, colorless, bubbly, difficult 
P- profuse, yellow, red, burning 
K- moderate, whitish, milky 

Inner Conditions 

Appetite/Food: 

V- erratic, variable, eats quickly, likes warm, oily 
food 

P- sharp, strong, eats moderately fast, likes cold 
food 

K- low, constant, eats slowly, likes warm, dry food 

Taste: 

V- sweet, sour, salty, oily, spicy foods 
P- sweet, bitter, astringent, raw or steamed, bland 
foods 

K- pungent, bitter astringent, spicy, non oily foods 
* Ama (toxins) in the system causes one not to follow 
the above natural inclinations. 

Circulation: 

V- low, variable, palpitations, aggravated by wind, 
cold, and dryness 

P- excellent, warm, aggravated by heat, fire, and 
sun 

K- slow, steady, aggravated by cold and dampness 

Life Pace: 

V- fast, unsteady, erratic, hyperactive 
P- moderate, purposeful, goal-oriented 
K- slow, steady, regal 

Endurance: 

V- low or fluctuating 

P- moderate to high, heat intolerance, pushes until 
one bums out 

K- strong, steady, slow starters, moderate perfor¬ 
mance 

Disease Tendency: 

V- nervous and immune system diseases, pain, ar¬ 
thritis, mental, bones 

P- infections, febrile, blood, inflammatory dis¬ 
eases, yellow or green mucus 
K- respiratory diseases, clear or white mucus, 
edema, and obesity 






Section 2: Analysis 


Chapter 3: Analysis of Constitution and Illness 


Disease Resistance: 

V- poor, weak immune systems 
P- moderate, infections, bleeding 
K- good, strong immune system, consistent 

Medicinal Healing Tendency: 

V- quick, low dosages, nervous reactions 

P- moderate 

K- slow, higher dosages 

Pulse: (quality is the most important thing) 

V- 80-100, irregular, rapid, snake-like quality 
P- 70-80, wiry, frog-like quality 
K- 60-70, slow, warm, steady, wide, swan-like 
quality 

Sexual Nature: 

V- variable, strong desire but low energy, few chil¬ 
dren 

P- moderate, passionate, domineering, quarrel 
some 

K- constant, low, devoted, many children 

Pain: (blocked or wrong movements in the srotas 
cause the severest pain) 

V- severe - sharp, shocking, disruptive, churning, 
beating, throbbing, tearing, variable, colic, 
migratory, intermittent 

P- moderate - burning, steaming, swelling, bleed¬ 
ing 

K- mild - heavy, dull, constant, congestion 

Fever: 

V- moderate heat, variable, irregular, thirst, anx¬ 
ious, restless 

P- highest heat, burning, thirst, sweating, irritable, 
delirious 

K- lowest heat, dull, heavy, constant 

Discharges: 

V- noises (joint cracking, moaning, sighing), gas 
P- blood, bile, yellow or green pus 
K- mucus, clear or white pus, salivation, water 

Mouth: 

V- dry, astringent taste 

P- bitter, pungent taste, salivation 

& 


K- sweet, salty tastes, excess salivation, discharge 
of mucus 

Throat: 

V- dry, rough pain, constricted esophagus 
P- sore, inflamed, burning 
K- swollen, dilated, edema 

Stomach: 

V- frequent belching, and/or hiccuping, feeling a 
sense of constriction, variable appetite, less 
secretions 

P- cancer, ulcers, burning, sour or pungent (eruc¬ 
tations) belches or hiccups, excess appe¬ 
tite, heart burns 

K- slow digestion, sweet or mucoid belching, nau¬ 
sea, vomiting 

Liver/ Gall Bladder: 

V- dry, rough, irregular activity, scanty secretions 
P- soft, inflamed, abscesses, increased activity, 
excess bile, gall stones (most liver and gall 
bladder problems are Pitta related) 

K- enlarged, heavy, firm, little bile, lower activity 

Intestines: 

V- dry, distention, gas, constipation, disorders of 
peristalsis 

P- excess secretions, inflamed, ulcers, abscesses, 
tumors, cancer, bleeding, perforation, rapid 
peristalsis 

K- coated with mucus, obstructed, edema, tumors, 
distention, slow peristalsis 

Initial Signs of Disease: 

V- variable, irregular rapid onset 
P- high fevers, moderate onset 
K- constant, slow onset from congestion 


Mental Traits 
Sensitivities: 

V- noise 
P- bright lights 
K- strong odors 





The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Voice/Speaking: 

V- low, weak, whining, monotone, quick, 
talkative, rambling, imaginative 
P- high, sharp, clear, precise, organized, detailed, 
orators, moderate, argumentative 
K- deep, tonal, singers, slow, silent 

Dreams/Sleep: 

V- flying, running, fearful, light sleep 
P- fighting, in color, moderately deep 
K- romantic, water, few, heavy, deep sleep 

Mind/Senses: 

V- fear, anxiety, apathy, sorrow, delusion, uncon¬ 
sciousness, insomnia, needing heat, 
strongly dislikes cold things, loss of coor¬ 
dination indecisive 

P- violent, delirious, dizzy, fainting, needing cold, 
poor senses, intoxicated, restlessness, 
heated head, impatient, hot tempered, criti¬ 
cal 

K- calm, lethargic, stupor, excessive sleep, slow 
perception, desires heat, dull, inert 

Memory/Learning: 

V- quick to learn ideas but also forgets quickly, 
likes to study many things but becomes un¬ 
focused, leams by listening 
P- focused, penetrating, discriminating, 

goal oriented, learns best by reading and 
with visuals 

K- slow to learn but never forgets, learns by asso¬ 
ciation 

Nature: 

V- adaptable, quick, indecisive 
P- penetrating, critical, intelligent 
K- slow, steady, dull 

Memory: 

V- understands ideas quickly, then forgets quickly 
P- clear, sharp 

K- slow to leam, but once learns, never forgets 

Faith: 

V- erratic, rebellious, changeable 
P- leader, goals, fanatical 


K- loyal, constant, conservative 

Emotions: 

V- anxious, nervous, fearful 
P- angry, irritable, argumentative 
K- content, calm, sentimental 

Habits: 

V- travel, culture, humor, eccentric 

P- politics, sports, dance, competitive 

K- water sports, flowers, cosmetics, business, lazy 

Mental Disorders: 

V- anxiety attacks, hysteria, trembling 
P- rage, tantrums, excess temper 
K- depression, sorrow, lethargic 


Discussion 

Once the dosha has been determined, the 
present illness or health concern ( vikriti) is dis¬ 
cussed. Through a series of questions regarding 
the degree of air, fire, and water affecting the con¬ 
dition, the vikriti will become clear. 

It is more crucial to learn what the patient ex¬ 
periences than merely naming the illness. Another 
way of cross-referencing disease is finding the site 
of the condition. For example, dryness, or general 
weakness in the colon, bones, and thighs; anxi¬ 
eties; and worry are symptoms of Vayu. Heat, in¬ 
fection or acid of the liver, spleen, heart, blood, 
gall bladder; yellow or green mucus, anger, impa¬ 
tience, and irritability are symptoms of Pitta. With 
dampness, water (e.g., in the lungs), white or clear, 
abundant mucus, overweight, and lethargy, Kapha 
is the cause. If symptoms include more than one 
dosha, then it is possible that both doshas are the 
cause. 

Different physical and mental imbalances may 
exist. The practitioner investigates “the cause of 
the cause.” For example, if a person wants to lose 
weight, therapy can begin in one of three ways. 
First, one may address the symptom with allopathic 
weight loss pills. Obviously, this is the most su¬ 
perficial method. Second, one may realize that the 





Section 2: Analysis 


Chapter 3: Analysis of Constitution and Illness 


cause of the weight is a Kapha tendency and fol¬ 
low appropriate Kapha-reduction therapies. Yet, a 
deeper level still exists. What is the cause of the 
overeating? Perhaps it is an Vayu-imbalanced 
mind, producing worry or anxiety. Kapha imbal¬ 
ances create a need for love and contentment. These 
factors may cause a person to eat more. Therapies 
include herbs and foods to reduce weight, calm 
the mind, and culture the heart. Scidhanci (medita¬ 
tion) is also advised to develop inner calm and Self- 
love. 

When viewing weight gain from another van¬ 
tage point, finding out what causes anxiety in the 
person may uncover dharmic (life-purpose), kamic 
(spiritual relationship), or spiritual situations, that 
are making the person unhappy. 

The dharmic reasons are easily discovered when 
asking patients if they love the career in which they 
are presently working. They specifically need to 
say they love it. When they acknowledge that they 
do, the practitioner can focus more deeply into 
kama and moksha (Self-Realization) questioning. 

If they admit they are unhappy with their ca¬ 
reers, a deeper question is asked; “What is it you 
would love to do if you could, regardless whether 
it seems possible or practical?” Often patients re¬ 
alize that once, before they stopped doing some¬ 
thing they loved, they did not have a weight prob¬ 
lem; only after they stopped doing what they love 
(e.g., teaching dancing) did the weight gain occur. 
Thus, the practitioner uncovers the ultimate cause 
of the weight problem. People doing what they love 
to do find their lives are transformed in a very short 
time. 

Spiritual lacking is yet another dimension that 
may cause overeating and overweight. It is the 
cause of all causes of diseases. An inner lack of 
fulfillment may exist in one’s career, relationship 
or in their self worth. These persons are urged to 
begin taking small steps towards involving them¬ 
selves in whatever they need for inner nourishment. 
These three topics will be discussed in detail later 
in the book. 

So we see that the discussion portion of the 
consultation covers mind, body, career, relation¬ 
ships, and spirituality. This makes for a truly ho¬ 
listic investigation. 


Nutrition 

We have briefly touched upon the topic of tastes, 
as they are related to the seasons. This may seem 
quite an unusual way to look at the seasons, but 
nonetheless, a useful one when considering health. 
To better understand the idea of taste from the 
Ayurvedic viewpoint, it needs to be examined more 
deeply. These insights offer an explanation of the 
role of tastes in healing. Unique to Ayurveda is a 
scientific breakdown of tastes, discussed accord¬ 
ing to energies or energetics. Ayurveda classifies 
herbs, foods, and drinks into five categories. Each 
has its own therapeutic effects: 

1. Taste 

2. Element (property) 

3. Heating or cooling effect 

4. Post-digestion effect (final taste after digestion) 

5. Special properties 

Taste: Is considered therapeutic for several rea¬ 
sons. The Sanskrit word for taste is “Rasa”. It 
means delight or essence, both of which are heal¬ 
ing. A nerve channel extends from the mouth into 
the head that brings the essence (one definition of 
taste) to the brain. This essence stimulates prana, 
which in turn stimulates the agni or digestive fires. 
If the taste of the food is not pleasing, the gastric 
fires may not digest the food and one will not re¬ 
ceive proper nutrition. That is why Ayurvedic 
cooking is a science unto itself, blending the right 
amount of herbs for the right taste. In our society, 
we have mixed our sense of taste with unwhole¬ 
some (artificial) objects of food (one of the two 
fundamental causes of disease). 

Element: Six tastes originate from the five ele¬ 
ments, transmitting their properties: sweet sour, 
salty, pungent, bitter, astringent. All tastes essen¬ 
tially belong to the water element, having their 
origin here. No food consists only of one taste; all 
five elements are contained in all substances. So 
when it is said that a food has a certain taste (e.g., 
sweet), it means predominantly that taste. Simi¬ 
larly, no illness is caused purely by one dosha. 





The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


However, when a dosha predominates, it is said 
that an illness is caused by that specific dosha. 


Taste 

Element 

Food 

sweet 

earth/water 

sugar, starches 

sour 

earth/fire 

fermented, acids 

salty 

water/fire 

salt, alkaline 

pungent 

fire/air 

spicy, acrid, 
aromatic 

bitter 

ether/air 

herbs 

astringent 

earth/air* 

constricting 
quality with 
tannin 


All persons need some of each of the six tastes 
in their daily diet. However, depending on one’s 
constitution, health condition, and the season, they 
will take varying amounts of the tastes to balance 
their dosha. The key is to have a moderate amount 
of each taste. 

The benefits listed on the next page result from 
ingesting foods that develop these healing mea¬ 
sures. However, they relate primarily to the 
dosha{ s) listed. If used by a dosha not listed, they 
will create excess. 


*Astringents can either aggravate or 
pacify Kapha due to its earth and 
air elements, respectively. 



Wo^onxaai 57 U-ilLIlA. 
















Section 2: Analysis 


Chapter 3: Analysis of Constitution and Illness 


Taste 

(Rasa) 

Physical Effect 

Mental Effect 

sweet 

VP- 

builds & strengthens tissues, life sap (ojas), 
bones complexion 

contentment, 

pleasure 

sour VK- 

digestiveaid, dispels gas, nourishes, relieves 
thirst, satiates, helps circulation and 
elimination, strengthens heart, aids all tissues 
but reproductive, maintains acidity 

wakens mind & 

senses 

salty V- 

softening, lubricates tissues, laxative, sedative, 
digestive aid, promotes sweating, purgative, 
emetic, softens hard tumors, decongests hard 
phlegm, maintains mineral balance, 
holdswater, improves taste 

calms nerves, 
stops anxiety 

pungent 

VK- 

heals throat diseases and VK allergic rashes, 
skin diseases, counters water, grease, and fat; 
digestive aid, dispels gas, removes edema, 
improves taste, promotes sweat, improves 
metabolism and organic functions, breaks up 
stagnant blood or clots and other hard masses, 
clears channels, relieves nerve pain and 
muscle tension 

opens mind 
and senses 

bitter 

PK- 

heals anorexia, thirst, skin diseases, fever, 
nausea, burnng, parasites, and bacteria; blood 
purifier, cleanses, detoxifies, reduces fat, 
tissue, and water excesses; antibiotic, 
antiseptic, digestive aid, cleanses breast milk, 
digests sugar and fat 

clears senses and 
emotions 

astringent 

PK- 

stops bleeding and cleanses blood, sweat, 
diarrhea, heals skin and mucus membranes, 
prolapse, and ulcers; expectorant, diuretic, 
tightens tissues, dries moisture and fat 

cools fiery 
minds and clears 
senses and 
emotions 
removes lethargy 


V = Vayu, P = Pitta, K = Kapha, means reduces that dosha 

X 59 














The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Negative Effects Due To Excess 

In the table below are the diseases that result 
from ingesting foods that create excesses in the 
doshas. In excess, eventually any dosha will 
develop these ailments. 


Taste 

(Rasa) 

Physical Effect 

Mental Effect 

sweet K+ 

excess fat diseases; 
obesity, diabetes 
indigestion, 
malignant tumors, 
neck gland 
enlargement 

Kapha: 
lethargy, 
Vayu: anxiety 

sour P+ 

flabbiness, loss 
ofstrength, fever, 
thirst, blindness, 
itching, pallor, Pitta 
anemia, herpes, small 
pox 

giddiness, 

anger, 

impatience, hot 
temper 

salty PK+ 

hypertension,baldnes- 
s, gray hair, skin 
diseases, wrinkles, 
thirst, herpes, loss of 
strength, abscesses 

anger, 

impatience, 

lethargy 

pungent 

P+ 

thirst, depletion 
ofreproductive fluid 
and strength,f 
ainting, tremors, 
waist/back pain 

anger, 

impatience 

bitter V+ 

tissue depletion, Vayu 
diseases 

anxiety, fear, 
insomnia 

astringent 

V+ 

undigested foods, 
heart pain, thirst, 
emaciation, 
virilityloss, 
constipation, blocked 
channels 

anxiety, worry, 
fear, insomnia 


It is interesting that Ayurveda is not concerned 
with naming diseases. It determines illness accord¬ 
ing to the excesses and deficiencies of the elements 
or doshas (air, fire, and water). When doshas are 


balanced, illness does not exist. From this point of 
view, one can see that by understanding the effects 
of the six tastes upon the doshas, nutrition becomes 
an elemental and effective measure in maintain¬ 
ing the balance of health. The charts shown above 
also reveal how various diseases are seen to be di¬ 
rectly related to tastes and doshas. Thus, by fol¬ 
lowing an appropriate food plan for one’s consti¬ 
tution, a person may maintain health and prevent 
future illness. 


Energy (Vlrya) 

This energy causes the activation of tastes. 
Foods and drinks possess either cool or hot energy 
(in the body). Each taste has an associated energy. 


Taste 

Energy 

Foods 

sweet 

cold 

sugar 

sour 

acidic*/hot 

yogurt, wine, 
pickles 

salty 

hot 

table salt, 
seaweed 

pungent 

hot 

hot peppers, 
chillies, wine 

bitter 

cold 

alum, golden 
seal, neem 

astringent 

constricting 

alum, oak 
bark 


* Yogurt is sour, sweet, and heavy. Pure forms of the 
tastes will aggravate one’s dosha more easily than 
complex versions and thus should be used with care. 

























Section 2: Analysis 


Chapter 3: Analysis of Constitution and Illness 


Aggravating 

Pacifying 

sugar 

complex carbohydrates 

table salt 

sea weed 

hot peppers (e.g., cayenne) 

mild spices (e.g., 
cardamom) 

alcohol 

yogurt, sour fruit 

pure bitters (e.g., 
goldenseal) 

mild bitters (aloe gel) 

pure astringents (strong 
tannins) 

mild astringents (e.g., red 
raspberry) 


Post Digestive (Vipaka) 

Tastes may change at the end of the digestive 
process. This is due to the digestive agni fire juices 
in the alimentary tract (metabolism). For example, 
foods or liquids, initially sweet, develop an after¬ 
taste. This taste may be any of the six tastes. These 
after tastes also affect a person’s constitution. Be¬ 
low is the general determination of vipaka tastes 
(however there are always exceptions). 


6 Tastes 

Post-Digestive 

Taste 

sweet, salty 

becomes sweet 

sour 

remains sour 

pungent, bitter, 
astringent 

becomes pungent 


[Throughout this text, the following abbreviations 
will occur; ‘V’ ‘P ’ ‘K’ stands for Vayu, Pitta, and 
Kapha respectively, ‘-’standsfor reducing a closha 
and ‘+ ’ means increasing a dosha] 

Sweet VP- K+ (moist) promotes secretion of 

Kapha, semen, easy and comfortable gas, 
and helps the discharge of urine and feces. 
Produces saliva. 

dr 


Sour P+ increases the tissues (except the repro¬ 
ductive dhatu, which is reduced). It pro 
duces bile, acid. 

Salty P+ produces saliva. 

Pungent P+ (in time) causes gas, constipation, pain¬ 
ful urine, reduces semen with difficult dis 
charge. 

Bitter PK- V+ produces dryness and gas in the 
colon. 

Astringent PK- V+ constricts, bothers Vayu. 

Emotions and Taste 

Each of the six tastes produces or enhances a 
certain emotion when eaten. Thus, emotional dis¬ 
orders may be balanced by eating and avoiding 
foods according to their tastes. 


Taste 

Emotions 

Excesses 

sweet 

desire 

Kapha 

sour 

envy 

Pitta 

salty 

greed 

Kapha/Pitta 

pungent 

anger 

Pitta 

bitter 

grief 

Vayu 

astringent 

fear 

Vayu 


Doshas, Nutrition, and the 6 Tastes 

Vayu is balanced by supplementing with moist 
tastes, sweet, sour, and salty (balancing dryness), 
and some warm tastes as well. Pitta is balanced by 
using sweet (moist), and bitter and astringent (cool¬ 
ing) tastes. This helps counter heat-related illness 
(e.g., infection, rash, anger, impatience). Kapha 
diseases are removed by using sour and pungent 
tastes (i.e., they heat and burn up water). Bitter 
tastes, by causing a drying action, also reduce 
Kapha. 

Sweet: Generally, food is sweet in taste, neutral in 
energy, and sweet in its post-digestive effect. It 

Xk 



























The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


decreases Vayu and Pitta, and increases Kapha. It 
nourishes and maintains humors, dhatus (tissues), 
and malas (wastes). 

Sour: Examples of sour tastes include sour fruit, 
tomatoes, and pickled vegetables. All tissues are 
nourished by sour tastes—except reproductive tis¬ 
sue (of the sour tastes, only yogurt nourishes all 
tissues). 

Salty: Seafood or condiment. In moderation, salt 
strengthens all tissues. When used in excess, it 
depletes tissues. 

Pungent: Spices and spicy vegetables do not offer 
much nutrition, but they stimulate digestion. 

Bitter: Such vegetables offer little nourishment. 
They are useful in clearing and cleansing diges¬ 
tive organs, and in aiding digestion, especially if 
taken before meals (for Pitta and Kapha doshas). 

Astringent: This is mainly a secondary taste. As¬ 
tringent foods, like green vegetables or unripe 
apples, provide minerals but do not build tissue. 

Energy: Most foods are neutral in heating and 
cooling effects. To apply hot or cold therapeutics, 
appropriate spices and foods are eaten cooked or 
raw. 

Heavy/Light: Most foods tend to be heavy, though 
many light foods also exist. Spices can make foods 
lighter. Oils can make them heavier. 

Dry/Moist: Foods are also dry or moist. Eating 
dry foods or toast can increase dryness. Frying 
foods or adding liquids can increase moistness. 


Special Properties: (Prabhava) 

Herbs also have some subtler, more specific 
qualities, beyond their traditional rules and defini¬ 
tions. For example, basil, although a heating herb, 
reduces fever. Herbs with similar energies will have 
different special properties. 


Certain external actions affect the herbs’ 
prabhava', mantras, gems, or just the intention or 
love imparted by the practitioner alters the herbs 
beyond the general classifications. For example, 
dmalaki (embellica officinalis) and barhal (a vari¬ 
ety of ficus bengalensis, linn.) both have the same 
taste, property, energy, and post-digestive taste. Yet 
dmalaki alleviates the doshas and barhal aggra¬ 
vates the doshas. Also til (sesame seeds) and madan 
(randia dumetorum, lamk.) have predominantly 
sweet, astringent, and bitter tastes. Both are oily 
and sticky. Yet, madan is an emetic, while sesame 
is not. Similarly, wearing specific stones like to¬ 
paz, ruby, sapphire, etc. can heal different diseases. 

Dual Doshas 

It is simply a matter of balance. When doshas 
are not in a balanced state, one has to increase the 
depleted dosha and/or decrease the aggravated 
dosha. When aperson has a dual dosha (e.g., Vayu/ 
Pitta) they are advised to ingest foods and herbs 
that increase the third or deficient element (e.g., 
Kapha). Simultaneously, one reduces the intake of 
foods and herbs that increase the two excessive 
doshas (e.g., Vayu and Pitta). 

Foods affect the surface nutrition, while herbs 
aid the subtle nutrition. There also may be instances 
when one dosha is greatly excessive, and a second 
is mildly aggravated. Thus, proper consideration 
of the degree of derangement is necessary as well. 

Tastes and Organs 

Each of the six tastes also produces effects on 
each of the internal organs as well. Again, through 
ingesting the proper tastes, the health of the or¬ 
gans may be maintained. 


Physiology of the 6 Tastes 

Ayurveda says that each taste, when found in 
excess in the body will adversely affect certain 
organs in the body. This information is used as a 
cross-reference to the five-element view of health 
and balance, stated earlier. 







Section 2: Analysis 


Chapter 3: Analysis of Constitution and Illness 


Taste 

Organ 

Sweet 

spleen (pancreas) 

Sour 

liver 

Salty 

kidneys 

Pungent 

lungs 

Bitter 

heart 

Astringent 

colon 


Thus, Ayurveda offers a unique view of the 
energetics of taste: six tastes (the initial taste, its 
hot or cold energy, and its after taste), how tastes 
are related to the doshas, organs, diseases, and 
emotions and their special properties. It is a com¬ 
plete science of the mechanics and energies of 
nutrition. Further, it reveals a causal relationship 
between food and health; how one feels is greatly 
decided by what one eats. 

As discussed earlier, Ayurveda aims to remove 
the cause of an illness. Rather than ‘curing’ a spe¬ 
cific disease, this science addresses the balance of 
the whole individual. It always considers the three 
levels of health: body, mind, and external causes. 
This chapter has examined the Ayurvedic view of 
how the tastes and energies of foods play a direct 
role in creating health or illness. 

Life habits (external) are considered another 
essential Ayurvedic healing measure when life 
style changes are gradually adapted. In the origi¬ 
nal Ayurvedic texts, people are cautioned to gradu¬ 
ally change their habits. Starting or stopping hab¬ 
its (even healthy ones) too suddenly, causes shock 
to the system. In the chapter on the seasons, a subtle 
seven-day transition period between seasons is 
noted and utilized to help people avoid disease 
during the shift. In the spiritual texts, we find simi¬ 
lar wisdom about the transition points at sunrise, 
noon, sunset, and midnight. It is suggested that 
these are points of weakness and that the person is 
better advised to spend these transitional times in 

dr 


sadhana (meditation). [Astrologically, the 1st, 8th, 
15th, and 16th days, starting with the new and full 
moon cycle, are also transitional days best suited 
for sadhana —or at least reduced activity.] 

Even for a healing science that suggests veg¬ 
etarianism to those who are healthy, Ayurveda does 
not advise giving up meat “cold-turkey “ (no pun 
intended). Even if a food is bad for one’s constitu¬ 
tion (e.g., one’s favorite vegetables or desserts), or 
good for their dosha , gradual stopping and start¬ 
ing of any life habit is advised. Gentleness is the 
key. Similarly, if one too radically undertakes a 
detoxification program, one may experience un¬ 
comfortable cleansing, like diarrhea or excess tox¬ 
ins aggravating the body as they come out. 
Ayurveda has the unique position of offering a 
healing process that does not have to make one 
feel bad before feeling better; one needn’t feel 
punished for changing to a healthier way of life. 
Thus, healing becomes enjoyable. It makes life 
better, simpler, more natural, and it enhances spiri¬ 
tual growth as well. It may take some months be¬ 
fore a healing effect is felt. Making one or two 
changes for health, and consistently following 
them, is better than experimenting here and there 
without a foundation for growth and healing. The 
Ayurvedic motto is, “no pain - no pain.” 

Also, people often look for quick healing— 
magic medicine that allows them to continue with 
their bad habits. In fact, illness is a sign (i.e., a 
teacher) that life is not being lived in balance. Herbs 
are a food supplement, not magic pills that instantly 
remove discomfort. Some people may be impa¬ 
tient with this ‘gradual’ lifestyle development, but 
it is enhanced lifestyle and not a quick, topical cure 
that Ayurveda achieves. 

Chronic indigestion also needs a slow change. 
One week of kicharl (rice and beans) may be 
needed for those with severe conditions. Again, 
some people may be disinclined to make changes, 
but the alternatives (i.e., illnesses) are less pleas¬ 
ant. Eventually one finds a food plan that feels 
comfortable. 

As discussed earlier, food essence rises through 
the channel to the brain, so it is crucial that whole¬ 
some foods are taken for its sattwic (pure) essence. 
Organic is also very good. Sattwic essence posi- 

Xk 













The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


tively affects the mind. A completely Scittwic mind 
is the first stage of samadhi ( Saibikalpa ). 

Suggested Reading 

Amber, B.B. Pulse Diagnosis. Santa Fe, NM: Au¬ 
rora Press; 1993. 

Lad, V. Ayurveda; The Science of Self Healing. 

Santa Fe, NM: Lotus Press; 1984. 

Murthy, K.R. Srikantha. (transl.) Ashtanga 
Hridayam. Varanasi, India: Krishnadas Acad¬ 
emy; 1991. 

Frawley, D. Ayurveda Certification Course. Santa 
Fe, NM: American Institute of Vedic Studies; 
1992. 

Frawley, D. Ayurvedic Healing. Salt Lake City, UT. 
Passage Press; 1989. 

Frawley, D., Lad,V. The Yoga of Herbs. Santa Fe, 
NM: Lotus Press; 1986. 


Gupta, K.R.L. Science of Sphygmica or Sage 
Kanad on Pulse. Delhi, India: Sri Satguru 
Publications; 1987. 

Sharma, PV. (transl.) Charaka Samhitci. Varanasi, 
India: Chaukhambha Orientalia; 1981. 
Sharma, R.K., Dash, B. (transl.) Charaka Samhitci. 
Varanasi, India: Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series 
Office; 1992. 

Sikdar, J.C. (editor/transl.) Nadivijhanam and 
Nadiprakasham. Prakrit Bharti Academy: 
Jaipur, India; 1988. 

Singh, Dr. R.H. Pahcha Karma Therapy. 

Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series: Varanasi, India; 
1992. 

Tirtha, S.S.S. Ayurveda Certification Course. 
Bayville, NY: Ayurveda Holistic Center Press; 
2004. 






Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 4: Herbology 


Section 3 

Ayurvedic Therapeutics 


371^ MKhcHK^H*! 


Each therapy discussed in this section reveals 
Ayurveda’s unique “personalized” approach, in the 
same way the fundamentals and analysis sections 
revealed individualization according to the three 
doshas. Once learned, all other healing therapies 
from all other cultures may be integrated into this 
Ayurvedic framework, and can be made more per¬ 
sonalized. 


This section will cover the following topics: 


$ 65 


1. Herbology 

2. Nutrition 

3. Pancha karma 

4. Abhyahga 

5. Aromatherapy 

6. Hatha yoga therapy 

5. Sound Therapy: Mantras, Chakras , and Music 

6. Color, Gem, and Ash Therapies 

7. Lifestyle counseling and Exercise 

8. Psychology, Ethics, and Spiritual Counseling 







The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 













Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 4: Herbology 


All our sorrows arise because we do not love or establish friendship with the One with whom we 
should. We place our love and friendship in people instead of God. 

-Swami Shankar Purushottam Tlrtha 


Chapter 4 
Herbology 


jij|w erbs represent the most effective 
Jy Ayurvedic approach to healing illness. 

^ Their action is strongest when they are 
fresh, but they may also be used as decoctions, 
infusions, teas, powders, and pills. Pills have the 
least power, but retain their potency the longest. 
Below are some of the most commonly used 
Ayurvedic herbs available in America today. 

Herbs are classified according to which dosha 
they decrease and increase. Decreasing a dosha is 
useful for a person of that body type, while an herb 
that increases one’s dosha will aggravate it. For 
example, a Vayu person will be helped by ginger, 
a warm herb, but be irritated by goldenseal, a dry, 
bitter herb. This is yet another reason the Ayurvedic 
paradigm is so extraordinary. This personalizing 
aspect of Ayurveda can be integrated into all other 
healing systems. Here we will see an example of 
this by classifying some Western herbs according 
to the Ayurvedic framework. 

Ayurveda uses herbs according to their ener¬ 
gies or “energetics.” The same five unique classi¬ 
fications discussed under nutrition in the last chap¬ 
ter also apply to herbs. Each herb has its own thera¬ 
peutic effects. 

1. Initial taste 

2. Element 

3. Hot or cold effect 

4. Post digestion effect 

5. Special properties 

Taste is considered therapeutic for several rea¬ 
sons. The Sanskrit word for taste is rasa. It means 
delight or essence, both of which are healing. If 
the taste of the food is not pleasing, the gastric 


fires may not digest the food, and thus proper nu¬ 
trition is not received. That is why Ayurvedic cook¬ 
ing is a science unto itself, blending the right 
amount of herbs for the right taste. In our society, 
we have confused our sense of taste with unwhole¬ 
some (artificial) objects of food, thereby creating 
disease. 


The Six Tastes 

According to Ayurveda, all foods and liquids 
contain six tastes: sweet, salty, sour, pungent, bit¬ 
ter, astringent, or combinations. As discussed in 
the previous chapter, each of the six tastes either 
increase, or decrease, each dosha. To review; 
Sweet : Reduces Vayu and Pitta and increases 
Kapha 

Sour : Reduces Vayu and increases Pitta and Kapha 
Salty : Reduces Vayu and increases Pitta and Kapha 
Pungent : Reduces Kapha and increases Pitta and 
Vayu 

Bitter : Reduces Pitta and Kapha and increases 
Vayu 

Astringent : Reduces Pitta and Kapha and increases 
Vayu 

Everyone needs some of each of the six tastes 
every day. Depending on one’s constitution, how¬ 
ever, persons mostly eat from the tastes that bal¬ 
ance their dosha. The key is moderation. In fact, a 
general rule of thumb in life is 

Everything in moderation, 
including moderation. 

Xk 











The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Physical and Mental Properties 
of the Six Tastes 

The symbols V, P, K stand for Vdyu, Pitta, and 
Kapha. For example, VP- K+ is read the following 
way: Vdyu and Pitta are reduced; Kapha is 
increased. 

Sweet VP- K+ 

Phvsical : Strengthens tissues, good for com¬ 
plexion, hair, throat, sense organs, ojas, children, 
and the elderly. It heals broken bones, effects lon¬ 
gevity, is an emollient, expectorant, and a mild 
laxative. Sweet tastes build the body, increase 
breast milk, and are difficult to digest. 

Mental : Provides contentment and is harmoniz¬ 
ing. 

In Excess : Causes overweight, indigestion, dia¬ 
betes, fainting, enlarged glands, and cancer. 

Salty V- PK+ (V+ in excess) 

Physical : Clears channels and pores, improves 
digestion, produces sweat, enhances taste, pen¬ 
etrates tissues, causes lacerations, and bursting of 
tissues and abscesses. 

Mental : Sedative, calms nerves, stops anxiety 

In Excess : Increases blood, causes balding, gray 
hair, wrinkles, thirst, skin diseases, herpes, weak¬ 
ens body strength. 

Sour V- PK+ 

Phvsical : Good for the heart, digestion, relieves 
burning sensations, satiating, moistens, is easily 
digested, oily, dispels gas, nourishes, relieves thirst, 
aids circulation, aids all tissues except reproduc¬ 
tive, maintains acidity. 

Mental : Awakens the mind and senses. 

In Excess : Flabbiness, loss of strength, blind¬ 
ness, giddiness, itching irritation, pallor, herpes, 
swellings, smallpox, thirst, fevers. 

Pungent K- P+ (V+ in excess) 

Physical : Heals throat diseases, allergic rashes, 
skin disorders, edema, ulcer swelling; dries oili¬ 
ness, fat, and water; promotes hunger, taste, and 
digestion; eliminates dosha excesses, breaks up 
hard masses, expands body channels. 

Mental : Opens the mind and senses. 


In Excess : Causes thirst, fainting, tremors and 
pains, depletes reproductive fluid and strength. 

Bitter PK- V+ 

Phvsical : Heals anorexia, parasites, thirst, s ki n 
disorders, fever, nausea, burning sensations, 
cleanses breast milk and throat, is easily digested, 
promotes intelligence, and is drying. 

Mental : Clears the senses the emotions. 

In Excess : Depletes tissues. 

Astringent PK- V+ 

Phvsical : Cleanses blood, stops bleeding, sweat, 
diarrhea, heals ulcers, is drying, difficult to digest, 
causes indigestion, tightens tissues, heals prolapse. 

In Excess : Causes gas, thirst, emaciation, loss 
of virility; obstructs channels, causes constipation 
and pain in the heart area, inhibits digestion. 


Tastes, Energy and Properties 


Hot 

Hotter 

Hottest 

salty 

sour 

pungent 

Cold 

Colder 

Coldest 

sweet 

astringent 

bitter 

Dry 

Drier 

Driest 

astringent 

bitter 

pungent 

Causes Constipation 

Oily 

Oilier 

Oiliest 

sour 

salty 

sweet 

Promotes elimination of 
feces, urine, and gas 

Digestibility 

Difficult 

More 

Difficult 

Most 

Difficult 

salty 

astringent 

sweet 

Digestible 

Easy 

Easier 

Easiest 

sour 

pungent 

bitter 










































Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 4: Herbology 


With this information in mind, let us look at 
the various therapies, beginning with herbs. For 
each herb, the energetic description offers the 
trifold effect of ‘taste—energy—post-digestive 
taste.’ Below are 85 Ayurvedic herbs with uses. 


85 Important Ayurvedic Herbs 

1. Akarkara 

2. Adrak (Fresh Ginger) & ShunthI (Dry Ginger) 

3. AmalakI 

4. Amlavetasa (Rhubarb) 

5. Apamarga 

6. Arjuna 

7. Arka 

8. AShoka 

9. Ashwagandha 

10. Ativisha 

11. Bakuchl 

12. Bhriiigaraj 

13. Bala (Indian Country Mallow) 

14. Bhutrina (Lemon Grass) 

15. BhuamalakI 

16. Bibhltakl 

17. Bilwa 

18. Bola 

19. Brahml (Gotu Kola) 

20. Brihatl 

21. Chakra Marada 

22. Changer!, Amlika 

23. Chirayata 

24. Chitrak 

25. Daruharidra/Daruhaldi (Barberry) 

26. Devadaru (Himalayan Cedar) 

27. Dhanyak (Coriander/Cilantro) 

28. Dhatak! 

19. Ela (Cardamom) 

30. Eranda (Castor Oil) 

31. Gauriphal (Red Raspberry) 

32. Gokshura (Caltrops) 

33. Gudmar 

34. Guduch! 

35. Guggul (Indian Bedellium) 

36. Haridra (Turmeric) 

37. Haritak! 

38. Hhabgol (Ispaghula or Spogel Seeds) 


39. JatamanshI 

40. Kakamach! 

41. KakanaSha 

42. Kanchanar 

43. Kantkar! 

44. Kapikachhu (Atmagupta) 

45. Katuka 

46. Kumari (Aloe Vera) 

47. Kumkum (Saffron) 

48. KuSha (Durba) 

49. Kushtha (Kut) 

50. Laghu Patha (Jal Jamn!) 

51. Mamlra (Gold Thread) 

52. Manjishtha (Indian madder) 

53. Maricha (Black Pepper) 

54. Musta (Nutgrass) 

55. NagkeShar 

56. Nimba (Neem) 

57. Nirgund! 

58. Pashana Bheda 

59. Pippali (Long Pepper) 

60. Praval (mineral) 

61. Punarnava 

62. Rasonam (Garlic) 

63. Rechanaka (Raktam) 

64. Salam-Mishr! 

65. Sariva (Sarasparilla) 

66. Sarpagandha 

67. Shatikh Pushp! 

68. Shatavar! 

69. Shilajit (mineral) 

70. Shwetamusali (White Musali) 

71. Snuhi (Vajra) 

72. Tagara (Valerian) 

73. Tejbal (Tumburu) 

74. Tila (Sesame) 

75. Trayman (Wild Violet) 

76. Tuls! (Holy Basil) 

77. Twak (Cinnamon) 

78. Vacha (Calamus) 

79. VamSha Lochana (Bamboo Manna) 

80. Varahlkand (Yam) 

81. Vasaka (Vasak) 

82. Vatsnabh (Aconite) 

83. Vidanga 

84. Vidar! Kanda 

85. Yashtlmadhu (Licorice) 





The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Ten Traditional Herb Mixtures 

1. Triphala - VPK=, for all tridoshic diseases, con¬ 

stipation, diarrhea, eyes, cleansing or 
detoxing the colon, good for Kapha con¬ 
ditions, gas, distention, diabetes, parasites. 

2. Trikatu - VK- P+, for colds, flu, fevers, stimu¬ 

lates appetite, cough, congestion, for low 
agni and dma, thyroid, detoxification. 

3. Chvavan PraSh - VPK=, general tonic, cough, 

strengthening lungs from asthma etc., long¬ 
term healing migraines, good for pregnant 
mothers, post-partum strength, and for 
babies; anemia, debility, T.B. 

4. Sitopaladi - VPK=, colds, flu, fevers, increases 

appetite, reduces burning sensations in the 
extremities. 

5. La van Bhaskar - VK- P+, stimulates appetite, 

malabsorption, constipation, abdominal 
pain, tumors. 

6. Mahasudarshan - P- VK+, for Pitta fevers, nau¬ 

sea, enlarged liver and spleen. 

7. Dashmul - VPK = V-, arthritis, strengthens tis¬ 

sues, debility, postpartum condition of fe¬ 
males, cold, flu, body pain, and stiffness. 

8. Avipattikar Churna - P- VPK=, used for hypera¬ 

cidity, heartburn, ulcers, colitis, stomach 
pains, indigestion, chronic constipation. 

9. Hingwastak - VPK= mainly V-, indigestion, 

bloating (upward-moving apdna). 

10. Yogaraj Guggul - VK- P+ (in excess), arthritis, 

joint pains, stiffness, cholesterol, arterio¬ 
sclerosis, rheumatism, gout, lumbago, back pain, 
hernia, goiter, sciatica, acts on the pituitary gland 
and hormone swelling, immune system, all Vayu 
disorders including nerve disorders, depression, 
and insomnia; heals bone fractures. 

It is also good for circulation, blood purifying, 
reduces masses, breaks up stagnation, cardiac tonic 
(reduces myocardial necrosis), antiseptic, respira¬ 
tory conditions, pulmonary TB, enlarged and in¬ 
flamed lymph glands, urinary disorders, endometri¬ 
tis, hemorrhoids, inflamed colon, hepatitis, ulcer¬ 
ated mouth, throat, tooth, and gum problems 
(gargle), skin conditions, increases white blood cell 
count. Do not use with acute kidney infections or 
acute stages of rashes. 


(.Kaishore Guggul is for Pitta-gout, inflamma¬ 
tions, burning joints, herpes, and all blood diseases; 
Pure Guggul is for Kapha. They have similar ac¬ 
tions). Triphala Guggul is best for weightloss and 
cholesterol. Kahchanar Guggul is best for lymph 
glands 

[VPK= means good for all doshas] 


Empowering Herbs 

When herbs are mixed or prepared, a hij (seed) 
mantra is often recited to empower the herb’s prop¬ 
erties by enlivening all five elements: ether, air, 
fire, water, and earth. Bij are the essence of all other 
mantras. Thus of all the mantras they have the most 
power. One such mantra is 

Aum Ing Hrlng Shring 
Kllng Sang a Shamboah Namah 

This mantra can be repeated once, seven, 31, 
or 108 times. It may also be repeated in intervals 
of 108 times. The number 108 is a mystical num¬ 
ber in the Vedic sciences. Thus, chanting 108 times 
further empowers the herbs. 


An Ayurvedic Story 

Two brothers came to their guru. “Baba,” 
said one brother, “our Pitta is excessive in our 
mouths. Thus, we always argue with each other. 
Please give us some Ayurvedic medicine to relieve 
our aggravated Pitta.” 

Their guruji responded, “Whenever you feel 
the Pitta rising, each of you are to take a mouthful 
of water. Neither swallow nor spit it out, as water 
calms fire and the fire is in the mouth. So long 
as you keep the water in the mouth, you will not 
be plagued by arguing.” 
















Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 4: Herbology 


Ayurvedic Materia Medica 



Under the energetics category, the symbols V, P, K 
stand for Vdyu, Pitta and Kapha respectively. A 
‘+’ means an herb increases the dosha, a ‘-’means 
the herb reduces the dosha. ‘=’ means it is good 
for all three doshas. 


Sanskrit : Akarkara 

Hindi : Akarakara 
English : Pellitory 
Latin : Anacyclus 
pyrethrum DC. 

(Pyrethrum radix) 

Part Used : Root 
Habitat : Himalayas: 

3,000-12,000 feet; 

Bengal, Arabia 
Energetics : pun¬ 
gent/hot/pungent 
VKP+ 

Tissues : Nerves, bones 
Systems : Nervous, excretory, reproductive 
Action : Stimulant, sialagogue, nerve tonic 
Uses : Nerve disorders, bowel conditions, seminal 
debility, gargle for tooth problems (e.g., toothache), 
sore throat and tonsils; paralysis, hemiplegia, epi¬ 
lepsy, rheumatism, promotes talking in retarded 
children, with honey for epilepsy (internal and as 
snuff), diabetes. Promotes saliva. 

Preparation : Powders, pills, paste 









Sanskrit : Ardrakam/Shuntha (Shunthi) 

ii (^3t) 

Hindi : Adrak/Sunth 
English : Fresh Gin¬ 
ger/dry Ginger 
Latin : Zingiberis 
officinale roscoe. 

Part Used : Rhizomes 
Energetics : Pungent, 
sweet-hot-sweet VK- 
P+ 

Tissues : All 
Systems : Digestive, 
respiratory 
Action : Analgesic, 
antiemetic, aromatic, 
aphrodisiac, carmina¬ 
tive, diaphoretic, digestive, expectorant, nervine, 
sialagogue, stimulant. 

Uses : Ginger is truly a wonder drug, having so 
many healing properties. It was called the univer¬ 
sal medicine. Taken with rock salt it reduces Vayu; 
with rock candy it reduces Pitta; with honey it re¬ 
duces Kapha. 

Fresh : Mixed juice with water and cane sugar, 
boiled to a syrup—add saffron and powders of car¬ 
damom, nutmeg, and clove and preserve well. This 
ginger-jam, called Allaepauk, is useful indigestion, 
flatulence, colic, vomiting, spasms, stomach and 
bowel pains with fever, colds, cough, asthma, and 
increasing Pachaka Agni (responsible for diges¬ 
tion). 

For indigestion, mix equal parts juice with 
lemon juice and rock salt (found in Indian grocer¬ 
ies), and take just before meals. Taking the juice 
with rock salt, before meals, cleanses the throat 
and tongue, and increases the appetite. For bile and 
delirium due to biliousness, take ginger juice with 
cow’s milk (2:7 ratio), boil to half volume and add 
rock-candy powder, and take before bed. Or mix 
juice with mango juice, cane sugar, and cow ghee\ 
mix and melt to half the quantity and take morn¬ 
ings and evenings. 

For sore throats, hoarseness, and laryngitis, 
sometimes chewing a piece of fresh ginger pro¬ 
duces saliva and soothes these conditions. Juice 

rubbed on navel relieves diarrhea. Ginger and on¬ 
's^. 


































The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


ion juice relieve nausea, vomiting, and retching. 
Juice with rock candy (twice daily) remedies dia¬ 
betes (mellitus and insipidus), For nervous head¬ 
ache, mix ginger juice with milk, let dry, and use 
as snuff. 

Dry. With black and long peppers ( trikatu) it is 
a carminative. Added to purgatives, it prevents nau¬ 
sea and the gripe. For indigestion and low appe¬ 
tite, mix with ghee or hot water. With painful bow¬ 
els or stomach make an infusion of dry ginger, and 
mix with 1-2 tbs. castor oil. Alternatively, mix some 
asafoetida with ginger powder. For chronic rheu¬ 
matic pain (Vayu or Kapha), colds, excess mucus, 
take ginger powder tea before bed, and cover up 
with blankets to promote sweating. In cases of 
headaches, make a paste of ginger and aloe gel or 
water, and apply to the head and take a nap or be¬ 
fore evening sleep. The same paste maybe applied 
to the face for tooth or face aches. For headaches 
caused by nerves, mix a paste of ginger, cinna¬ 
mon, castor root, and cloves (equal parts); and ap¬ 
ply to the head. 

For fainting, apply a thin paste of ginger and 
water to the eyelids, or place a mix of smith , black 
pepper and pippall under the nostrils in small 
pinches. This will also help stupor, delirium and 
senselessness caused by brain fever. 

Other uses: Arthritis, belching, heart disease, 
laryngitis (use as a tea and an external paste on 
throat), vomiting, constipation, strengthens 
memory, removes obstructions in the vessels, in¬ 
continence, flatulence, colic, spasms, fever, eye 
diseases, and asthma. Juice is better for colds, 
cough, vomiting, deranged Vayu, and as a dia¬ 
phoretic. Dry ginger is better for increasing agni 
and reducing Kapha. 

Spiritual Uses : Most sattwic (spiritually pure) spice 
Precautions : Aggravates Pitta (i.e., inflamed s ki n 
diseases, fever, bleeding, ulcers, etc.) 

Preparation : Fresh juice, infusion, decoction, pow¬ 
der, pill, paste 


Sanskrit : Amalaki (meaning: the nurse) 



Energetics : Mostly sour, but include all tastes (ex¬ 
cept salty)-cold-sweet VP- (K+ and ama in excess) 
Tissues : All; increases ojas 
Systems : Circulatory, digestive, excretory 
Action: Aphrodisiac, astringent, hemostatic, laxa¬ 
tive, nutritive tonic, refrigerant, rejuvenative (for 
Pitta), stomachic 

Uses : All Pitta diseases, all obstinate urinary con¬ 
ditions, anemia, biliousness, bleeding, colitis, con¬ 
stipation, convalescence from fever, diabetes, gas¬ 
tritis, gout, hair (premature gray/balding), hepati¬ 
tis, hemorrhoids, liver weakness, mental disorders, 
osteoporosis, palpitation, spleen weakness, tissue 
deficiency, vertigo; rebuilds blood, bones, cells, and 
tissues. It increases red blood cell count and regu¬ 
lates blood sugar; heart tonic, cleanses mouth, stops 
gum bleeding, stops stomach and colon inflam¬ 
mation; cleanses intestines, strengthens teeth, aids 
eyesight, highest natural source of vitamin C (3,000 
mg. per fruit), worms, acidity, eye and lung inflam- 





















Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 4: Herbology 


mations, ulcerations, G.I. disorders, painful urina¬ 
tion, internal bleeding. 

Spiritual benefits: It is sattwic (pure) in quality, 
gives love, longevity, and good fortune. For moth¬ 
ers who behave angrily towards their children, it 
calms and balances their emotions. For children 
who have lost their mother, it fills them with the 
sense that their mother is there. Thus, amalaki has 
another name, dhatri, meaning “mother” in San¬ 
skrit 

Precautions : May cause acute diarrhea in Pitta 
doshas. Pregnancy 

Prepared : Decoction, powder (1/4-3 tsp.), sweets 


Sanskrit : Amla-vetasa, Ami Parni 



Hindi : Revand-chini, Archu 
English : Rhubarb 

Latin : Rheum emodi Wall., (R. officinale, R. 
acuminatum, R. speciforme, R. webbianum, R. 
moorcroftianum, R australe). 

Part Used : Root (dried rhizomes) 

Habitat : Himalayas: 8,000-13,000 feet; Kashmir, 
Nepal, Sikkim, Bhutan, China, Tibet, Russia, Tur¬ 
key, and many other countries 
Energetics : Bitter-cold-pungent PK- V+ 

Tissues : Plasma, blood, fat 
Systems : Excretory, digestive 


Action: Purgative, alterative, hemostatic, anti¬ 
pyretic, anthelmintic, stomachic, bitter tonic, ca¬ 
thartic, laxative, atonic indigestion Uses: Consti¬ 
pation (with fevers, ulcers, infections), diarrhea, 
Pitta dysentery, jaundice, liver disorders. One of 
the best purgatives (milder than senna), protects 
colon tone, used with licorice and psyllium in older 
and dryer persons (ginger or fennel is added to re¬ 
move griping action—4 parts rhubarb: 1 part gin¬ 
ger or fennel); purges bile, ama, stagnant food and 
blood; reduces weight and fat; is safe for children 
(also for teething and nutritional balancing), atonic 
dyspepsia, or indigestion; duodenal catarrh. It is 
stronger when used with Epsom salt. 

Preparation : Infusion, powder (1 gm.—laxative; 3 
gms.—purgative), pill 

Precaution : Pregnancy, chronic diarrhea, chills, not 
for Vayu hemorrhoids; not used with gout, rheu¬ 
matism, epilepsy, or uric acid diseases. It turns the 
urine yellow but there is no cause for concern 


Sanskrit : Apamarga 

vFTFTFf 



Hindi : Apamara 

English : Rough Chaff Tree, Prickly Chaff Flower 
Latin : Achyranthes aspera Linn. 

Part Used : Herb, leaves, seeds, root flower (whole 
plant) 

Habitat : Small herb throughout India under 4,000 
feet 

Energetics : Pungent, bitter-cold-pungent VK- P+ 
Tissues : Plasma, blood, fat, nerves 
Systems : Circulation, digestion, nervous 
Action : Diuretic, expectorant, antibilious 
































The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 




Uses : Decoction; diuretic for renal edema, stom¬ 
ach ache, hemorrhoids, boils, skin eruptions; with 
honey or rock candy for early stages of diarrhea 
and dysentery; leaves mixed with jaggery or black 
pepper into a paste as pills for fevers, cough, in¬ 
sect bites, and bee stings. Leaf juice applied to s ki n 
for overexposure to the sun. Leaves or seeds are 
used for poisonous animal bites. Seeds are used as 
an expectorant, or mixed with rice water for bleed¬ 
ing hemorrhoids. Khlr or Payasam with seeds in 
milk for brain diseases. Seeds soaked in yogurt/ 
water overnight and ground into an emulsion the 
next morning heals bilious complaints. 
Preparation : Decoction, powder, paste, oil, infu¬ 
sion 

Precaution : Do not use while pregnant 


Sanskrit : Arjuna 

sD 

Hindi : Arjun 
Latin : Terminalia 
arjuna W. & A., 

Pentaptera glabra; 

P. angustifolia 
English : Arjuna 
Myrobalan 
Part Used : Bark 
Energetics : Astrin- 
gent-cold-pungent 
VPK= V + arrhyth¬ 
mia 

Tissues : Reproductive, plasma, blood 
Systems : Digestive, circulatory, reproductive 
Action : Cardiac stimulant, rejuvenative, astringent, 
hemostatic, alterative 

Uses : Best herb for heart disease (prevents and 
helps in the recovery of), angina, heals heart tis¬ 
sue scars after surgery, bile, edema, fractures, con¬ 
tusions, broken bones, diarrhea, malabsorption, 
venereal disease, heals tissues. Externally —ulcers, 
acne, skin disorders. 

Spiritual Uses : May help the spiritual heart 
Preparation : Decoction, herbal wine, powder (1/ 
4-3 tsp.) 

Precaution : May aggravate arrhythmia 


Sanskrit : Arka 


Hindi : Aka 

English : Gigantic Swallowort 
Latin : Caltropis gigantea R. Br. 

Part Used : Root, root bark, leaves, juice, and flow¬ 
ers [two varieties; purple/red flowered or white 
flowered (C. procera)] 

Habitat : Shrub is mainly found in wastelands in 
lower Bengal, Himalayas, Punjab, Assam, Madras, 
South India, Sri Lanka, Singapore, Malay Islands, 
South China 

Energetics : Pungent, bitter-hot-pungent Red KP- 
White V- 

Hssues: Plasma, muscles, fat, nerves 
Systems : Digestion, circulation, nervous, urinary, 
water metabolism 

Action : Special care is taken while using this herb, 
as it is poisonous. Mucilaginous, digestive, sto¬ 
machic, tonic, antispasmodic, emetic (large doses), 
diaphoretic, (root bark—alterative), purgative, ex¬ 
pectorant, anthelmintic, acrid, antiparasitical 
Uses : Promotes secretion (especially of bile), in¬ 
testinal muscle sedative, heart (used like digitalis), 
phlegm purge, depilatory, parasitic infection, re¬ 
duces pain, difficult/painful urination, skin dis¬ 
eases, abdominal disorders, dysentery, syphilis, 
fevers with enlarged liver and cough; intermittent 
fevers, hemorrhoids, edema. Leaves are for paraly¬ 
sis, anesthesia, and toxic asthma. Flowers—diges¬ 
tive tonic and stomachic, small doses stimulate 
capillaries, skin (including elephantiasis, leprosy), 
asthma. Milky juice—violent purgative, G.I. irri¬ 
tant. 

Preparation : Paste, powder, pill 




































Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 4: Herbology 


Precaution : Special care is to be taken while using 
this herb, as it is poisonous. Do not use while preg¬ 
nant. Use only with the advice of an Ayurvedic 
specialist 


Sanskrit : Ashoka 



Hindi : AShoka, Anganapriya 
English : Ashoka Tree 
Latin : Saraca indica Linn. 

Part Used : Bark, 

Habitat : Pound throughout India; cultivated in gar¬ 
dens for its beautiful flowers 
Energetics : Bitter, astringent-cold-pungent 
Tissues : Blood, fat, reproductive 
Systems : Reproductive 
Action : Astringent, sedative 
Uses : A main herb for uterus health; uterine/ova¬ 
rian fibroid and tumors, menorrhagia, dysmenor¬ 
rhea, colic or abdominal pain, uterine prolapse, in¬ 
flammatory conditions, colitis, urinary stones, 
bleeding hemorrhoids, bleeding dysentery. Bark for 
skin conditions. Prevents miscarriage {ghee- form) 
from 2 nd trimester). 

Preparation : Decoction, powder, pill, ghee , paste, 
herbal wine 



Hindi : Ashgandh 

Latin : Withania somnifera dunal (Physalis 
flexuosa); Solanaceae 
English : Winter cherry 
Part Used : Root 

Habitat : This shrub is in Himalayas, 6,000 feet; 
common in Bombay, Western India, sometimes in 
Bengal 

Energetics : Astringent, bitter-hot-sweet VK- (P and 
dma + in excess) 

Tissues : Mainly muscle, fat, bone, marrow/nerves, 
reproductive, but works on all. 

Systems : Nervous, reproductive, respiratory 
Action : Aphrodisiac, astringent, nervine, 
rejuvenative, sedative, tonic, antiinflammatory 
Uses : A main immune-boosting and brain tonic 
herb. AIDS, general debility, nerve exhaustion, 
pain killer, convalescence, problems of the elderly, 
sexual debility, emaciation, memory loss, muscle 
energy loss, marrow, overwork, tissue deficiency 
(and promotes tissue healing), insomnia, paraly¬ 
sis, MS, weak eyes, rheumatism, skin afflictions, 
cough, difficult breathing, anemia, fatigue, infer¬ 
tility, swollen glands, immune system problems, 
alcoholism, lumbago. Known as Indian ginseng, 
builds marrow and semen; inhibits aging; one of 
the best herbs for the mind (clarity, nurturing). 
Externally—skin diseases, obstinate ulcers, car¬ 
buncles, rheumatic swellings. For women, it sta¬ 
bilizes fetus, regenerates hormones, cancer— 
strengthens one from and for chemotherapy. 
Spiritual Uses : Sattwic, produces ojas 



Sanskrit : Ashwagandha (vitality of the horse) 

































The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Precautions : Do not take if congested. For cancer Latin : Psoralea 
and other serious illness, use one or more ounces corylifolia Linn, 
daily 

Preparation : Decoctions, ghee, oil, powder (1/4 to 
3 tsp.) herbal wine 


Sanskrit : Ativisha 

drl'Rwi 




Hindi : Atls; Atis 
English : Indian Atees 

Latin : Aconitum hetrophyleum Wall. (A. 
Cordatum.) 

Part Used : Dried tuberous roots 
Habitat : Sub-alpine and alpine regions; Himalayas 
from Indus to Kumaon 
Energetics : Bitter, astringent VPK= 

Tissues : Plasma, blood 
Systems : Digestive, immune, respiratory 
Action : Tonic, stomachic, antiperiodic, aphrodi¬ 
siac, carminative 

Uses : Hemorrhoids, vomiting, edema, liver disor¬ 
ders, Kapha and Pitta diseases; convalescing after 
fever, debility, diarrhea, dysentery, acute inflam¬ 
mations, cough, indigestion, chronic fevers, with 
honey for coryza. 

Preparation : Tincture, decoction, powder 

Sanskrit : Bakuchl 

Hindi : Babchi 
English : Babchi Seeds 


Part Used : Seeds 

Habitat : Common herbaceous weed found in Ben¬ 
gal, Bombay, throughout the Indian plains 
Energetics : Pungent, bitter-hot-pungent, bitter 
VKP= (P+ in excess) 

Tissues : Muscles, plasma, blood 
Systems : Respiratory, circulatory, muscular, lym¬ 
phatic 

Action : Aromatic, anthelmintic, antibacterial, an¬ 
tifungal, diuretic, diaphoretic, laxative, stimulant, 
aphrodisiac 

Uses : A main herb fo skin conditions—especially 
leukoderma, psoriasis (used both internally and 
as an external paste or ointment), fevers, internal 
ulcers, bile conditions, improves the color of s ki n 
(including removing white spots), hair, nails; tones 
liver, spleen, and pancreas; impotency, frequent or 
involuntary urine, cold or painful extremities, 
joints, or lower back; difficulty breathing, diarrhea, 
abdominal pain. 

Precautions : May increase Pitta when taken alone; 
do not take with low body fluids; do not use with 
licorice root 

Preparation : Five grams powder twice daily be¬ 
fore meals with some coriander and honey (to 
taste); as an external paste 

Sanskrit : Bala (meaning: strength giving) 

<4 HI 

Hindi : Bariar 

English : Country Mallow 

Latin : Sida cordifolia Linn. (S. herbacea, S. 

rotundifolia, S. althaeitolia.) 

Part Used : Root 

Habitat : Grows wild along roadsides throughout 
the tropical and sub-tropical plains of India and 








































Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 4: Herbology 



Sri Lanka 


Energetics : Sweet-cold-sweet VPK= (K and dma+ 
in excess) 

Tissues : All—especially marrow/nerves 
Systems : Circulatory, nervous, reproductive, uri¬ 
nary, respiratory 

Action : Analgesic, aphrodisiac, demulcent, di¬ 
uretic, nervine, rejuvenative, stimulant, tonic, vul¬ 
nerary 

Uses : A main herb for heart and body strength. 

Heart disease and stimulant; facial paralysis, TB, 
urinary conditions, heals tissues of chronic inflam¬ 
mation, sciatica, insanity, neuralgia and nerve in¬ 
flammation; removes deep seated, chronic, and in¬ 
termittent fevers (with ginger), chronic rheuma¬ 
tism, asthma, bronchitis, emaciation, muscular 
strength, exhaustion, sexual debility, cystitis, dys¬ 
entery, leukorrhea, convalescence, arthritis. Exter¬ 
nally it is good for numbness, nerve pain, muscle 
cramps, skin disorders, tumors, joint diseases, 
wounds, and ulcers. For cancer, it strengthens per¬ 
sons before and after chemotherapy. 

Precautions : Do not take in excess if congested 
Preparation : Decoction, powder, medicated oil. For 
serious illness like cancer, use one or more ounces 
daily 

Sanskrit : Bhringaraj (or Kesharaja) 

WDT 

c. 

Hindi : Bhangra (meaning, “ruler the hair”) 
English : None 

Latin : Eclipta alba Hassk. or Eclipta erecta Linn. 
Parts used : Herb, roots, leaves 
Habitat : Throughout India and the southwestern 
U.S. 


Energetics : Bitter, 
astringent, sweet/ 
cold/ sweet VPK= 

Tissues : Blood, 
bone, marrow, 
plasma 

Systems : Circula¬ 
tory, digestive, ner¬ 
vous 

Actions : Herbs—al¬ 
terative, antipyretic, 
hemostatic, laxa¬ 
tive, nervine, 

rejuvenative, tonic, 
vulnerary. Roots 
and leaves are 
cholagogues. 

Root—tonic, alterative, emetic, purgative. Leaf 
juice—hepatic tonic and deobstruent 
Uses : This is the main herb for the hair and cir¬ 
rhosis. It prevents aging, maintains and rejuvenates 
hair, teeth, bones, memory, sight, and hearing. It 
is a rejuvenative for Pitta, kidneys, and liver. As an 
oil, it removes graying, balding, makes the hair 
darker, and promotes deep sleep. Externally, it 
draws out poisons and reduces inflammations and 
swollen glands. It also improves complexion. The 
root powder is used for hepatitis, enlarged spleen, 
and skin disorders. Mixed with salt, it relieves burn¬ 
ing urine. Mixed with a little oil and applied to the 
head, it relieves headache. Two drops of expressed 
juice is mixed with eight drops raw honey and given 
to newborn children with colds and excess mucus. 
Mixed with castor oil, it removes worms. Juice 
placed in the ears removes earaches. A leaf decoc¬ 
tion is useful for uterine hemorrhaging (two to four 
ounces twice daily). Leaf paste applied to swollen 
glands and skin conditions helps them to heal. Leaf 
juice boiled in coconut oil makes a hair oil to re¬ 
move gray hair and balding. For pitariasis, alope¬ 
cia, and other s ki n diseases: Bhringaraj (16 parts), 
triphala, arka, and sdrivci (all equal parts) are all 
mixed with four times as much sesame oil and 
boiled into a medicated oil. 

Preparations : Infusions, decoction, powder, medi¬ 
cated oil and ghee 
Precautions: Can cause severe chills 




























The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 





Sanskrit : Bhutrin 
LET 

CN C. 


Hindi : Gandhatrana, Harl-chaha 
English : Lemon grass 

Latin : Andropogon citratus DC. (A. Shoenanthus) 

Part Used : Essential oil, herb 

Habitat : Grows wild in gardens in India, Sri Lanka 

and other tropics, in cultivated areas 

Energetics : Pungent, bitter-cold-pungent PK- (V+ 

excess) 

Tissues : Fat, nerves 
Systems : Nervous, metabolic 
Action : Antispasmodic, diaphoretic, diuretic, em- 
menagogue, stimulant; oil—carminative, refriger¬ 
ant, stomachic, tonic 

Uses : Bowel spasms, colic, diarrhea, dysmenor¬ 
rhea (neuralgic), fever, gas, colds, G.I. spasms, 
intestinal mucus membrane tonic and stimulant; 
vomiting. Oil/external—bath, perfume, and hair 
oils; with coconut for lumbago, rheumatism, neu¬ 
ralgia, sprains, pains, ringworm; excellent tea for 
Pitta and kidneys. 

Precautions : None 

Preparation : Infusion or decoction of leaves, pow¬ 
der 


Sanskrit : 

BhuamalakI 

H vHHH'hl 

cs 

Hindi : Bhuy 

amalakl; Niruri 
English : None 


Latin : Phyllanthus niruri Linn. (P. urinaria) 

Part Used : Leaves, root, whole plant 

Habitat : A perennial herb in Central and Southern 

India, to Sri Lanka 

Energetics : PK- V+ 

Tissues : Semen, plasma, blood, fat 
Systems : Digestive, reproductive, urinary 
Action : Bitter, astringent, de-obstruent, stomachic 
Uses : The main herb for the liver; colitis, cer¬ 
tain edema, gonorrhea, menorrhagia, urogenital 
diseases, dysentery, diabetes, dyspepsia; jaundice. 
Externally—poultice for ulcers, inflammations, 
sores, swellings, itch and other skin diseases; 
spongy and bleeding gums; uvulitis, tonsillitis. 
Preparation : Infusion, juice, poultice, powder, pill 


Sanskrit : Bibhitaki 

Hindi : Bhaira 
English : Beleric 
Myrobalan 
Latin : 

Terminalia 
belerica Roxb. 

Part Used : Fruit 
Habitat : A tree 
found through¬ 
out the Indian 
forests and 
plains 

Energetics : As- 
tringent-hot- 
sweet KP- (V+ 
in excess) 

Tissues : Plasma, muscle, bone 
Systems : Digestive, excretory, nervous, respiratory 
Action : Anthelmintic, antiseptic, astringent, expec¬ 
torant, laxative, lithotriptic, rejuvenative, tonic 
Uses : Nausea, cold, vomiting, cough, bronchitis, 
catarrh, chronic diarrhea, dysentery, eye disorders, 
laryngitis, headache, hemorrhoids, parasites, 
stones, Kapha digestive disorders, urinary tract 
stones, stomach, liver disorders, G.I. tract diseases, 
increases appetite; mixed with honey it is good for 

sore throats and voice (or used as a gargle). Brain 
& A' 
w8 











































Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 4: Herbology 




Hindi : Belaphal 
English : Bael 

Fruit 

Latin : Aegle marmelos Corr. 

Part Used : Fruit, root-bark, leaves, rind, flowers 
Habitat : Throughout India from the sub-Himalayan 
forests to Burma (Myanmar) 

Energetics : Sweet-cold-bitter, pungent (fresh juice) 
VPK= 

Tissues : Plasma, blood, nerves, semen 
Systems : Circulatory, digestive, reproductive, ner¬ 
vous 

Action : Aromatic, alterative, nutritive, astringent; 
hemostatic, tonic, laxative, digestive stimulant, sto¬ 
machic, stimulant, antipyretic, aphrodisiac, 
antibilious, febrifuge, antiparasitical 

& 


Hindi : Bol 
English : Myrrh 

Latin : Balasmodendron myrrha Nees. 

(Commiphora Myrrha) 

Part Used : Resin 

Habitat : Indigenous to North-East Africa, collected 
in Southern Arabia and Iran 
Energetics: Bitter, astringent, pungent, sweet-hot- 
pungent KV- (P+ in excess) 

Tissues : All 

Systems : Circulatory, lymphatic, nervous, repro¬ 
ductive, respiratory 

Action : Alterative, analgesic, antiseptic, antispas- 
modic, emmenagogue, expectorant, stimulant, 
rejuvenative 


and stomach tonic, Part of the triphald formula. 
Externally—as an antiseptic lotion; paste for Pitta 
swellings, eye diseases; dried ripe fruit—edema; 
with honey for ophthalmia. 

Preparation : Infusion, decoction, powder, paste 
Precaution : HighVayu 


Sanskrit : Bilwa 


Uses : A main digestive herb. Unripe is better than 
ripe; heart, stomach, Kapha disorders, intestinal 
tonic, chronic constipation and dysentery; some 
forms of indigestion; mucus membrane, chronic, 
obstinate mucus and catarrhal diarrhea; early stages 
of sprue and consumption; typhoid, debility, in¬ 
testinal disorders, prevents cholera and hemor¬ 
rhoids; intermittent fever (stem bark); hypochon¬ 
dria, melancholia, heart palpitation. Leaf poultice 
is applied to inflammations; with black pepper for 
edema, constipation, and jaundice; with water or 
honey it is good for catarrh and fever. Rind is used 
for acute and amoebic dysentery, griping pain in 
the loins and constipation, gas, and colic; sprue, 
scurvy. Pulp heals Vayu, Kapha, dma, and colic, 
is constipative. 

Sanskrit : Bola 




























The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 



Uses : Amenorrhea, anemia, arthritis, asthma, bron¬ 
chitis, cough, dysmenorrhea, menopause, rheuma¬ 
tism, traumatic injuries, ulcerated surfaces, as an 
infusion with rose petals (50 parts) used as a mouth¬ 
wash, mouth inflammations, as a gargle for spongy 
gums, used in tooth powder, indigestion, wasting 
diseases, prevents loss of hair, menstrual disorders, 
and chlorosis problems of young girls. 
Precautions : Can create excess Pitta 
Preparation : Infusion, powder, pill, paste 


Sanskrit : Brahmi 


Hindi : Brahma-manduki, Mandukaparni 
English : Gotu Kola, Indian Pennywort 
Latin : Hydrocotyle asiatica Linn. Umbelliferae 
Part Used : Herb 

Habitat : Common throughout India and the world, 
in shaded, watery places. 

Energetics : Bitter-cold-sweet VPK= 

Tissues : All except reproductive; mainly blood, 
marrow, nerve 

Systems : Circulatory, digestive, nervous, respira¬ 
tory, reproductive, excretory 
Action : Alterative, diuretic, febrifuge, nervine, 
rejuvenative 

Uses : Best rejuvenative herb for brain cells and 
nerves, intelligence. Adrenal purifier, AIDS, blood 
purifier, eczema, epilepsy, insanity, hypochondria, 
fevers (intermittent), hair loss, immune system 


boost (cleansing and nourishing), liver, longevity, 
memory, nervous disorders, psoriasis, senility, s ki n 
conditions (chronic and obstinate), venereal dis¬ 
eases, tetanus, convulsions, rheumatism, elephan¬ 
tiasis, bowel disorders. 

Spiritual Uses : The most scittwic herb 
Precautions : Large doses may cause headaches, 
spaciness, or itching 

Preparation : Infusion, decoction, powder, ghee , oil 
Note: Similar use as Bacopa Monniera 

Sanskrit : Brihatl 


Hindi : Kantakari, Birhatta 
English : Indian Nightshade 
Latin: Solanum indicum Linn. 




























Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 4: Herbology 


Part Used : Fruit, root, plant, seeds 
Habitat : Common throughout India 
Energetics : Astringent 
Tissues : Plasma, blood, reproductive 
Systems : Respiratory, reproductive, urinary, circu¬ 
latory 

Action : Plant—cordial, aphrodisiac, astringent, 
carminative, cardiac tonic, resolvent; root—di¬ 
uretic, expectorant, stimulant, diaphoretic. 

Uses : Asthma, dry and spasmodic cough; difficult 
childbirth, chronic fevers, chest pains, colic, gas, 
worms, scorpion stings, difficult urination, edema, 
enlarged and spleen; catarrh. Burning seed smoke 
is used for toothache (it is usually used along with 
other herbs). The root is one of the dashmul ingre¬ 
dients, and is usually mixed with other roots. It is 
good for edema, cough, mucus. Decoctions help 
dysuria. 

Preparation : Decoction, powder 


Sanskrit : Chakra Marda (ringworm destroyer) 



Hindi : Chakunda 
English : Cassia 
Latin : Cassia tora Linn. 

Part Used : Leaves, seeds, roots 
Habitat : This small plant grows in dry soil in tropi¬ 
cal India and in Bengal. 

Energetics : Plasma 
Systems : Circulatory 

Action : Externally—germicide, antiparasitical; 
Internally—gentle laxative 
Uses : Seeds and leaves are used for skin diseases. 
Mixed with lime juice, eases skin itch and erup¬ 


tions; ringworm (used externally). Leaf decoctions 
(1 part leaves : 10 parts water) given in two ounce 
doses to children, removes fevers during teething. 
Leaves boiled in castor oil are applied to foul ul¬ 
cers and inflammations. As a poultice, leaves has¬ 
ten suppuration. Warmed they reduce gout, sciatica, 
and joint pains. Seeds are used as a substitute for 
tea and coffee. 

Preparation : Decoction, paste, poultice, oil 


Sanskrit : Changen, Amlika 





Hindi : Amrul 
English : Sorrel 

Latin : Oxalis corniculata Linn. 

Part Used : Leaves 

Habitat : Common weed throughout India 
Energetics : Astringent-cold-pungent 
Tissues : Plasma, blood 
Systems : Digestive, excretory, circulatory 
Action: Cold, refrigerant, antiscorbutic, appetiz¬ 
ing, astringent 

Uses : Leaves—fever, inflammations, pain, appe¬ 
tite, scurvy, digestion, dyspepsia, intoxication, 
poisoning, difficult urination, bilious headaches, 
removes fibers over cornea or opacities of the cor¬ 
nea; Leaves boiled in yogurt/water ( lassi ), or mixed 
with honey or cane sugar for chronic dysentery, 
rectum prolapse, thirst and enteritis (small intes¬ 
tine inflammation), hemorrhoids; as a soup for 
convalescence from diarrhea. Juice—made into 
sherbet with honey or cane sugar for dysentery, 
rectum prolapse, thirst. Externally removes warts, 


& A» 






































The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


corns, etc.; applied locally as a poultice to inflamed 
areas and pain. Leaf juice with pepper and ghee 
are applied externally to red spots or other s ki n 
eruptions due to bile, removes warts. Mixed with 
onions and applied to the head for bilious head¬ 
aches. 

Precautions : Not taken with gout 
Preparation : Juice, powder, paste, poultice, pill, 
soup, confection 


Sanskrit : Chirayata (Kirata-tikta) 


fWRTT 




Hindi : Kiryat- 
charayatah 
English : None 
Latin : Swertia 
chirata Ham. 

Part Used : 

Leaves and 
whole plant 
Habitat : 

Himalayas; over 
4,000 feet 
Energetics : PK- 
V + (King of the 
Bitters) 

Tissues : 

Plasma, blood, 
muscle, fat 
Systems : Circulatory, respiratory 
Action : Anthelmintic, astringent, bitter tonic, feb¬ 
rifuge, stomachic, antidiarrhetic, antispasmodic 
Uses : Excellent for fever, s ki n diseases, blood pu¬ 
rifier, worms, wounds, malaria; tonic for heart, 
liver, and eyes, cough, scanty urine, sciatica, a gen¬ 
tian substitute, toxic blood, enlarged spleen and 
liver, catarrh, intestinal spasms, anemia, indiges¬ 
tion, obstinate urinary disorders (some say diabe¬ 
tes also), cleanse ulcers; the best form is (Tinnevelly 
Nilavembu). 

Precautions : High Vayu 
Preparation : Powder 


Sanskrit : Chitrak 

Hindi : Chitra 
English : White 
Leadwort 
Latin : Plum¬ 
bago zeylanica 
Linn. 

Part Used : 

Root, root bark, 
seeds 
Habitat : 

Throughout In¬ 
dia 

Energetics : VK- 
P, agni + 

Tissues : 

Bones, plasma, 
blood, reproductive 

Systems : Nervous, female reproductive 

Action : Stimulant, caustic; digestion, antiseptic, 

antiparasitical 

Uses : Sprue, worms, dysmenorrhea, small doses 
stimulate the central nervous system, externally 
used as paste it opens abscesses and used for s ki n 
diseases and ulcers; colitis, indigestion, hemor¬ 
rhoids, anasarca, diarrhea, gas, rheumatism, and 
all joint pains, promotes sweating. Tincture of root 
bark- intermittent fevers. 

Preparation : Paste, powders, pills, tincture 
Precaution : Do not use when pregnant; use only in 
small doses. Due to its very hot nature, it can cause 
abortion 



Sanskrit : Daruharidra, Daruhaldi 


Hindi : Kingor 
English : Barberry 
Latin : Berberis vul¬ 
garis Linn. 

Part Used : Berries 
Habitat: Found 



throughout the 











































Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 4: Herbology 


Himalayas, Nepal, Tibet, Afghanistan 
Energetics : Bitter, astringent-hot-pungent PK- V+ 
Tissues : Blood, fat, plasma 
Systems : Circulatory, digestive 
Action : Diuretic, antibilious, refrigerant, sto¬ 
machic, bitter tonic, antiperiodic, alterative, anti¬ 
pyretic 

Uses : For bile and urinary conditions, Pitta detoxi¬ 
fication, and congestion of abdomen and pelvic 
cavities; rheumatism, scarlet fever, brain disorders, 
heat, thirst, nausea; small amounts— tonic; large 
doses—purgative; excellent herb for jaundice, dur¬ 
ing pregnancy, mild laxative, periodic neuralgia, 
fevers, skin diseases, vomiting in pregnancy; fruit 
mild laxative/purgative for children, fevers, blood 
purifier, malaria, gastric and duodenal ulcers; sores, 
jaundice, enlarged liver and spleen, and regulates 
liver functioning, diabetes, and toxins lama (with 
twice as much turmeric); destroys toxins, reduces 
body fat (with turmeric); renal calculi, abdominal 
and pelvic congestion; G.I. stimulant, reduces 
blood pressure. 

Precautions : High Vayu, tissue deficiency 
Preparation : Decoction, powder, eyewash, medi¬ 
cated ghee , paste 


Sanskrit : Devadaru 

Hindi : Deodar; Tuna 
English : Hima¬ 
layan Cedar 
Latin : Cedrus 
deodara 
Part Used : 

Leaves, wood, 
bark, turpentine 
Habitat : Northern 
Himalayas 
Energetics : PK- 
V+ 

Tissues : Plasma, 
blood, muscle, fat 
Systems : Circula¬ 
tory, respiratory 




Action : Wood—carminative; bark—astringent, 
febrifuge; Leaves—mild turpentine properties 
Uses : Inflammation, antispasmodic, anti-poison, 
paralysis, kidney stones, fevers, external injuries. 
Bark—bilious, remittent and intermittent fevers, 
diarrhea, dysentery. In powder form it is applied 
to ulcers. The dark oil, or tar from the leaves (tur¬ 
pentine), is applied to skin ulcers and other s ki n 
diseases. (It is also used for mange on horses and 
on cattle with sore feet). 

Preparation : Oleoresin (oil or tar), powder 



Sanskrit : Dhanyak 

Hindi : Dhania 
English : Cori¬ 
ander/Cilantro 
Latin : 

Coriandrum 
sativum Linn. 

Part Used : 

Seeds,leaves 
Habitat : Com¬ 
mon throughout 
India 

Energetics : Bit¬ 
ter, pungent- 
cold-pungent 
VPK= 

Tissues : Blood, 
muscle, plasma 
Systems : Diges¬ 
tive, respiratory, 
urinary 

Action : Alterative, antibilious, aphrodisiac, aro¬ 
matic, carminative, diaphoretic, diuretic, stimulant, 
stomachic, tonic 

Uses : Main herb - digestive and skin/rash prob¬ 
lems. Griping, flatulent colic, rheumatism, neural¬ 
gia, indigestion, vomiting, intestinal disorders, re¬ 
moves excess Kapha, eyewash, conjunctivitis, re¬ 
lieves internal heat and thirst, urogenital system 
(burning urethra, cystitis, infections, etc.), sore 
throat, allergies, for all Pitta disorders, burning, 






































The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


juice for allergies, hay fever, and skin rashes (and 
externally as well); antidotes hot pungent foods, 
bleeding hemorrhoids. Externally—eye disorders. 
Preparation : Cilantro juice, infusions (hot and 
cold), powder 

Precautions : Not to be used in extreme Vayu nerve 
tissue deficiency 


Sanskrit: Dhataki 



Hindi : Dhai-phul 
English : None 

Latin : Woodfordia floribunda Salisb. (W. frut 
icosa; kurz; Lythrum fruticosum Linn.) 

Part Used : Flowers, leaves 
Habitat : Large shrub found throughout India 
Energetics : Astringent, slightly pungent-cold-sweet 
PK- V + Tissues: Plasma, blood, reproductive 
Systems : Reproductive, excretory 
Action : Stimulant, astringent, tonic 
Uses : Herpes, flowers in milk—dysentery, diar¬ 
rhea, etc. Flower powder—mucus membrane dis¬ 
orders, hemorrhoids, liver disorders, internal hem¬ 
orrhage; leukorrhea, menorrhagia. Leaves—bil¬ 
iousness, headache, fever. Externally, flower pow¬ 
der—ulcers, wounds; decoction as a lotion. 
Preparation : Infusion, powder 


Sanskrit : Ela 

Hindi : Elachi 
English : Carda¬ 
mom 

Latin : Elatarria 
cardamomum 
Maton (E. 
repens) 

Part Used : 

Seeds 

Habitat : Found 
throughout 
Northern, 

Western, and 
Southern India, 

Sri Lanka, and 
Burma (Myanmar). 

Energetics : Pungent, sweet-hot-pungent VK- (P+ 

in excess - Large eld ) In the U.S. 

only the small or choti ela is available. Choti eld is 

slightly cold and better for Pitta than for Vayu and 

Kapha). 

Tissues : Blood, marrow, nerve, plasma 
Systems : Circulatory, digestive, nervous, respira¬ 
tory 

Action : Carminative, diaphoretic, expectorant, di¬ 
gestive stimulant, stomachic 
Uses : Main digestive herb. Absorption of nutri¬ 
ents, asthma, bronchitis, colds, cough, excellent 
for stomach complaints, hoarseness, indigestion, 
loss of taste, helps the spleen and pancreas, reduces 
Kapha in lungs and stomach, stimulates the mind, 
with milk it reduces mucus formation, detoxifies 
caffeine in coffee, nervous digestion, vomiting, 
headache, belching, acid indigestion, nausea, ex¬ 
pels Vayu in colon and digests foods in colon, con¬ 
valescing from diarrhea, biliousness, respiratory 
disorders, involuntary urination. 

Spiritual Uses : Sattwic, gives clarity and joy 
Precautions : Ulcers, high Pitta 
Preparation : Infusion (don’t boil seeds), powder, 
milk decoction 





































Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 4: Herbology 


Sanskrit : Eranda, Vatari matism. For rectum disorders and hemorrhoids, it 

XT^rg is given in small doses to soften feces and lubri¬ 

cate the passage. Also helps with ingested glass. 
As a purgative, it is taken with ginger or dashmul 
teas. Externally used for sore nipples during breast 
feeding. In constipation it is used as an enema (2 
oz.: 1 pint water). Dropped into the eyes for con¬ 
junctivitis and irritations. It increases cow’s milk 
when they eat the leaves. Externally—oil mixed 
with rice water for leg swelling; oil mixed with 
coconut oil and water (1:2:6) for itching s ki n. 
Preparation : Oil doses: children- 1 tsp.; 
adults—2 tsp. - 3 tbs. in tea or boiled milk. 
Decoction, infusion, poultice, leaf, paste 
Precaution : Oil not used for kidney, bladder, bile 
duct, or intestine infections; jaundice, dysuria 


Sanskrit : Gauriphal 




Hindi : Rendi 
English : Castor 
Oil Plant 
Latin: Ricinus 


communis 
Linn. (R. 
dicoccus) 

Part Used : [two 
varieties —pe¬ 
rennial bushy 
plant with large 
fruits and red 
seeds—yield 
more oil; 
smaller annual 
shrub with 
small gray or 
white seeds 
with brown spots] oil, leaves, roots, seeds, fruit. 
Habitat : Common throughout India 
Energetics : Pungent, sweet-hot-pungent VPK+ 
Tissues : All 

Systems : Excretory, urinary, nervous, female re¬ 
productive, digestive 

Action : Cathartic, demulcent, analgesic, nervine, 
purgative (in the duodenum); root bark—purga¬ 
tive 

Uses : Main herb for swellings and purgation. 

Colic, headache, abdominal disorders, coagulates 
blood; fruit—enlarged liver and spleen; bark— 
nervous diseases, rheumatism, lumbago, sciatica; 
dried root—fevers; leaves—warmed and applied 
to nursing mother’s breasts acts as a galactagogue. 
When applied to the stomach, promotes menstrual 
discharge. Applied to painful joints, relieves pain; 
leaves internally—purgative. Seed decoction— 
lumbago, sciatica. Seed poultice is applied to ma¬ 
ture boils to promote bursting and to reduce gouty 
and rheumatic swellings. Oil—the “king of the 
purgatives”, “king of Vayu disorders”, inflamed 
bowels, infantile diarrhea, irritable conditions in 
debilitated adults and children; to facilitate deliv¬ 
ery of baby; after childbirth to mother; in opera¬ 
tions for urinary stones; peritonitis, jaundice, dys¬ 
entery, urinary organ inflammation, articular rheu- 


Hindi : None 
English : Red Rasp¬ 
berry 

Latin : Rubus 

wallichii 

Part Used : Leaves 
Habitat: 

Energetics : Astrin¬ 
gent, sweet-cold- 
sweet PK- (V + in 
excess) 

Tissues : Blood, muscles, plasma 
Systems : Circulatory, digestive, female reproduc¬ 
tive 

Actions : Alterative, antiemetic, astringent, hemo¬ 
static, tonic 

Uses : Diarrhea, dysentery, female reproductive 
organs, heartburn, thirst, cholera hemorrhoids, 
hemorrhage in stomach, inflamed mucous mem¬ 
branes, intestinal flu, menstruation (irregular or 
excess), kidneys, liver, nausea, Pitta disorders, pre¬ 
childbirth toning, prolapse of uterus or anus, sores, 
spleen, vomiting, tones lower abdomen muscles, 
uterine bleeding, sore throats, wounds, ulcers, pas¬ 
sive stomach hemorrhage, summer heat. 

Xk 
































The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Precautions : Most varieties promote abortion ex¬ 
cept American red raspberry; Vayu constipation 
Preparation : Hot or cold infusion, powder, paste 


Sanskrit : Gokshura (emphasize ‘go Meaning: 
shape of the cow’s-hoof) 

’fop 



Hindi : Chota-gokhru 

English : Small Caltrops, Goats head, Puncture Vine 
Latin : Tribulis terrestris Linn. (T. lenuginosus, T. 
aeylanicus) 

Part Used : Fruit 

Habitat : Trailing plant common in sandy soil 
throughout India, Sri Lanka, Madras. 

Energetics : Sweet, bitter-cold-sweet VPK= 
Tissues : Plasma, blood, marrow/nerve, reproduc¬ 
tive 

Systems : Nervous, reproductive, respiratory, uri¬ 
nary 

Action : Analgesic, aphrodisiac, diuretic, lithotrip- 
tic, nervine, rejuvenative, tonic 
Uses : Best herb for genitourinary conditions in¬ 
cluding difficult or painful urination, stones, bloody 
or burning urine, etc. Best herb to flush toxins 
from body. Back pain, cough, cystitis (chronic), 
diabetes, difficult breathing, Vayu edema, gout, 
uterine disorders, hemorrhoids, impotence, infer¬ 
tility, kidney disease (acute inflammation), lum¬ 
bago, nerve pain, Bright’s disease with edema, 
rheumatism, sciatica, seminal debility, kidney 
stones, venereal diseases. Strengthens the postpar¬ 
tum woman. Can be used with Punarnava 
(boerhavia diffusa; nyctagineae) for kidney health. 


Spiritual Uses : Sattwic, promotes clarity, opens 
crown chakra (energy center) 

Precautions : Do not use if dehydrated 
Preparation : Decoction, powder 


Sanskrit : Sarpa-darushtrika 

Hindi : Gudmar (meaning: sugar destroying) 

■MAH I < (common name) 



English : None 

Latin : Gymnemasylvestre 

Part Used : Roots, leaves 

Habitat : Climbing plant found in the Himalayas, 
Central and Southern India, and on the Western 
Ghats in Goa 

Energetics : Astringent, refrigerant, tonic PK-V+ 
Tissues : Plasma, blood, fat, reproductive 
Systems : Circulatory, urinary, reproductive 
Action : Antiperiodic, diuretic, stomachic 
Uses : A main herbs diabetes mellitus; removes 
sugar from pancreas, restores pancreatic function; 
leaves stimulate the circulatory system; increases 
urine secretion; activates the uterus; swollen 
glands; cough; fever. 

Precautions : Leaves stimulate the heart 

Preparation : Decoction, powder 

■s*. 



































Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 4: Herbology 


Sanskrit: Guduchi 



Hindi : Amrita, Giloy 
English : None 


Latin : Tinosporia cordifolia Miers; (Menisper mum 
cordifolium, Cocculuc cordifolia, E. Tinospora) 
Part Used : Roots, stems 

Habitat : Himalayas, throughout Madras Presidency 
districts 

Energetics : Bitter, sweet-hot-sweet VPK= 
Systems : Circulatory, digestive 
Action : Alterative, antiperiodic, bitter tonic, di¬ 
uretic, febrifuge 

Uses : One of the few tridoshic immune-boost¬ 
ing herbs (with Shilajit). AIDS, Pitta diseases, 
blood purifier, fever and convalescence from fe¬ 
vers, jaundice, digestion, gout, chronic rheuma¬ 
tism, constipation, hemorrhoids, dysentery, Kapha 
jaundice, skin disease, chronic malarial fevers, tu¬ 
berculosis, cancer (strengthens persons before and 
after chemotherapy). 

Spiritual Uses : Produces ojas 

Preparation : Extract, powder, for serious illnesses 

like cancer, use one or more ounces daily 

Sanskrit : Guggul 

wm 

Hindi : Gugal 

English : Indian Bedellium 

Latin : Balsamodendron mukul Hook. (B. 

agollocha., Commiphora mukul; C. africana) 

Part Used: Resin 



Assam, Berars, Khandesh 

Energetics : All but sour and salty-hot-pungent KV- 

(P+ in excess) 

Tissues : All 

Systems : Circulatory, digestive, nervous, respira¬ 
tory 

Action : Alterative, analgesic, antispasmodic, as¬ 
tringent, expectorant, nervine, rejuvenative, stimu¬ 
lant 

Uses : Best herb for arthritis, hyper-cholesterol, 

bronchitis, cystitis, debility, diabetes, disinfects 
secretions (e.g., mucus, sweat, urination), en¬ 
dometritis, fat reducing, gout, heals skin and mu¬ 
cus membranes; hemorrhoids, increases white 
blood cell count, indigestion, leukorrhea, lumbago, 
menstrual regulator, nervous disorders, neurosis, 
obesity, plaster for gums and throat ulcers, pus dis¬ 
charges, s ki n diseases, sores, tissue regenerating 
catalyst, heals bone fractures, toxin reducing, tu¬ 
mors, ulcers, whooping cough, edema, enlarged 
cervical glands, parasitic infection, abscesses, rheu¬ 
matic disorders. 

Precautions : Acute kidney infections and rashes; 
avoid eating sour, sharp indigestible things; exhaus¬ 
tion, sex, sun exposure, alcohol, and anger when 
taking this herb 
Preparation : Powder, pill 

Sanskrit : Haridra, Gauri 

Hindi : Haldi 

English : Turmeric 

Latin : Curcuma longa Linn. 



































The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Part Used : Rhi¬ 
zome, tubers 
Habitat : Through¬ 
out India 

Energetics : Bitter, 
astringent, pun¬ 
gent-hot-pungent 
K- (VP+ in ex¬ 
cess) 

Tissues : All 
Systems : Circula¬ 
tory, digestive, 
respiratory, uri¬ 
nary 

Action : Alterative, 
anthelmintic, anti¬ 
bacterial/antibi¬ 
otic, aromatic, carminative, stimulant tonic, vul¬ 
nerary 

Uses : Amenorrhea, anemia, arthritis, blood puri¬ 
fier, blood tissue formation, circulation, cooking 
spice, cough, diabetes, worms, jaundice, eye prob¬ 
lems, fevers, gas, hemorrhoids, edema, indigestion, 
ligament stretching, metabolism regulator; mucus 
relief, and hysteria (from inhaling fumes); phar¬ 
yngitis, protein digesting, skin disorders, abscess, 
urinary diseases, wound and bruise healer; a natu¬ 
ral antibiotic which also improves intestinal flora; 
inflammatory bowel syndrome (e.g., ulcerative 
colitis), Crohn’s Disease, chronic hepatitis, chronic 
bronchial asthma, psoriasis, all inflammatory con¬ 
ditions. External acne, insect bites, sore eyes, with 
honey or aloe gel for bruises or sprains. 

Spiritual Uses : Gives one the Divine Goddess’s 
energy and prosperity; chakra and subtle body 
cleanser; limbers for yoga asana practice 
Precautions : Do not use if pregnant, with excess 
Pitta, with acute jaundice or hepatitis. 
Preparation : Infusion, decoction, milk decoction, 
powder, external paste (with sandalwood). 

Sanskrit : HarltakI 
Hindi : Hardh, Har 

English : Myrobalan, Indian Gall Nut 
Latin : Terminalia chebula Retz., (T. reticulata) 
Part Used: Fruit 


Habitat : Tree 
grows wild in the 
forests of North¬ 
ern India, central 
provinces, Ben¬ 
gal, Madras, 

Mysore, southern 
Bombay presi¬ 
dency 

Energetics : All 
except salty-hot- 
sweet VPK= 

Tissues : All 
Systems : Diges¬ 
tive, excretory, 
nervous, respira¬ 
tory, female reproductive 

Action : Rejuvenative, tonic, astringent, laxative, 
nervine, expectorant, anthelmintic, alterative (un¬ 
ripe—laxative/ripe—astringent) 

Uses : Jaundice, colic, anemia, cough, asthma, 
hoarse voice, hiccup, vomiting, hemorrhoids, di¬ 
arrhea, malabsorption, abdominal distention, gas, 
fevers, urinary diseases parasitic infection, tumors, 
blood purifier, spleen and liver disorders; gargle 
for sore throat, mouth, or spongy, ulcerated gums; 
muscular rheumatism, with sugar water for oph¬ 
thalmia; heart, skin, itching, edema, nervous dis¬ 
orders, rejuvenative, feeds the brain and nerves; 
small doses—good for both diarrhea and consti¬ 
pation (also chronic); digestion, atonic indigestion, 
bleeding hemorrhoids, longevity, paralysis, head¬ 
ache, epilepsy, melancholy, memory, wisdom, in¬ 
telligence, organ prolapse, excessive discharges 
(cough, sweat, sperm, menorrhagia, leukorrhea); 
one of the three herbs in triphala. Externally for 
Vayu swellings, bums, scalds, s ki n disorders. 
Spiritual Uses : Gives pure awareness (Shiva en¬ 
ergy) 

Preparation : Decoction, powder, paste, gargle 
Precaution : Pregnancy, dehydration, severe exhaus¬ 
tion, emaciation, Pitta if taken in excess 

Sanskrit : Ishabgol, Snigdhajlra 



































Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 4: Herbology 



Hindi : Isapghul 

English : Ispaghula or Spogel Seeds 
Latin : Plantago ispagula; P. ovata Forsk. 

Part Used : Seeds 
Habitat : Throughout India 
Energetics : Cold, astringent VPK= 

Systems : Digestive/Excretory 
Action : Demulcent, emollient, laxative, diuretic 
Uses : Excellent for constipation (with warm wa¬ 
ter) and diarrhea (with cold water). Seed swell 
and thicken (mucilage) when soaked in water. It 
passes through the small intestine undigested, lin¬ 
ing the mucus membrane (demulcifying and lu¬ 
bricating). May inhibit intestinal organism growth. 
The thickened jelly absorbs toxins ( ama ) and bac¬ 
teria. It is useful for catarrh, chronic dysentery, 
intestinal problems, bladder, kidney and urethra 
problems (including inflammations and burning), 
digestive disorders, and fevers. Further uses include 
gonorrhea, gastritis, gastric and duodenal ulcers, 
cystitis, a demulcent for coughs and colds (espe¬ 
cially for children). 

Preparation : 1-2 tbs. in warm or cold water, stirred 
until it thickens into a gel 

Sanskrit : JatamanshI 

4dmi*n 

Hindi : Jatamashi, Balchar 
English : Muskroot; Indian Spikenard 
Latin : Nardostachys jatamansi DC. 

Part Used : Rhizome, rhizome oil 
Habitat : Himalayas: 9,000-17,000 feet; India, 
Nepal, Bhutan, Si kk im 



Energetics : Bitter, sweet, astringent-cold-pungent 
VPK= 

Tissues : Blood, marrow/nerve 
Systems: Circulatory, nervous, digestive, respira¬ 
tory, reproductive 

Action : Aromatic, antispasmodic, diuretic, emme- 
nagogue, nervine, tonic, carminative, deobstruent, 
digestive stimulant, reproductive 
Uses : Complexion, strength, kidney stones, jaun¬ 
dice, removes blood impurities, spasmodic hyste¬ 
ria and other nervous convulsive ailments; heart 
palpitations, nervous headache, flatulence, epi¬ 
lepsy, convulsions, respiratory and digestive dis¬ 
eases, s ki n conditions, typhoid, gastric disorders, 
seminal debility. 

Spiritual Uses : Increases awareness 
Precautions : None; its sedative properties increase 
awareness, whereas its cousin, valerian, dulls the 
mind 

Preparation : Infusion, powder 


Sanskrit : Kakamachi 

♦WWfl 

Hindi : Makoy 

English : Garden nightshade 

Latin : Solanum nigrum Linn. (S. rubrum, S. 

incertum) 

Part Used : Fruit, leaf 
Habitat : Throughout India 

Energetics : Bitter, sweet, astringert-cold-pungent 
VPK= 

Tissues : Plasma, blood, bones, fat, reproductive 








































The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 



Systems: Circulatory, respiratory, excretory, repro¬ 
ductive 

Action : Root—purgative, emetic, styptic 
Uses : Organic muscular system (especially heart 
and blood vessels), dysentery hemorrhoids, gon¬ 
orrhea. 

Preparation : Juice, powder 
Precaution : Difficult breathing, vomiting 


Sanskrit: Kanchanar 


Systems : Circulatory, reproductive 
Action : Leaf—alterative, sedative, diaphoretic, 
diuretic, hydragogue, expectorant; fruit—alter¬ 
ative, tonic, diuretic 

Uses : Heart disease (with leg and foot swelling), 
skin diseases, fruit for edema hemorrhoids, gon¬ 
orrhea, inflammatory swellings, enlarged spleen 
and liver, fevers, promotes perspiration, cough. 
External—painful, swollen testicles; poultice for 
rheumatic and gouty joints. 

Precaution : Berries may be poisonous for some 
people 

Preparation : Powder, extract, leaves, poultice, 
syrup, decoction 

Sanskrit : Kaknasha 



root, flowers 

Habitat : Bengal and throughout South India; West 
Indies, Jamaica 
Energetics : Astringent 

Tissues : Plasma, blood, muscle, reproductive 


Hindi : Kanchnar 
English : Mountain 
Ebony 

Latin : Bauhinia 
variegata Linn. (B. 
racemosa) 

Part Used : Bark, 
root, bud, gum, 
leaves, seed, flow¬ 
ers 

Habitat : Sub-Hima- 
layan tract, forests 
of India and Burma 
(Myanmar) 

Energetics : Sweet, 
bitter, astringent 
PK- V+ 

Tissues : Plasma, 
blood, 

Systems : Digestive, 
reproductive 
Action : Bark—alterative, tonic, astringent; root— 
carminative; flowers 
—laxative. 

Uses : Best for lymphatic system/glands Worms, 
gargle with bark liquid for sore throat; bud decoc¬ 
tion for cough, bleeding hemorrhoids, hematuria, 
menorrhagia. Bark emulsified with rice water and 
ginger for TB, enlargement of neck glands. Bark 
and ginger paste for TB tumors. Bark decoction 
for ulcer wash, skin diseases, diarrhea. Buds—di¬ 
arrhea, worms, hemorrhoids, dysentery. Root de¬ 
coction—indigestion, heartburn, gas, malaria, 
weight loss (anti-fat); flowers with sugar—gentle 
laxative; Kanchanar guggul —TB tumors, ulcers, 
s ki n diseases, gonorrhea, edema, increase white 







































Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 4: Herbology 


blood cells. [Ingredients; kahchanar bark (10 
parts): ginger, black pepper, long pepper, carda¬ 
mom, cinnamon, tejpatra leaves (cassia cinnamon), 
triphald (1 part of each of the above herbs)]. This 
is taken every morning with triphald or khadira/ 
(catechu/ acacia catechu, willd.) decoction. 
Preparation : Emulsion, paste, gargle, decoction 


Hindi : Kavach 
English: 
Cowitch or 
Cowhage Plant 
Latin : Mucuna 
pruriens Bak. 
M. prutita 
(Carpopogon 
p r u i e n s ; 
Dolichos 





Sanskrit : Kapikachhu, Atmagupta 

+fH+^, ctIVHWi 


Sanskrit : Kantkari 

+ 14 + 1(1 


Hindi : Choti Katheri 
English : None 

Latin : Solanum xanthocarpum Schrad and Wendil 
Part Used : Stems, roots, flowers, fruit 
Habitat : Grows abundantly throughout India 
Energetics : Pungent, bitter VP- K+ 

Tissues : Plasma, blood, marrow, reproductive 
Systems : Respiratory, reproductive 
Action : Aperient, digestive, alterative, astringent; 
stems, fruits, flowers—bitter, carminative; root— 
diuretic, expectorant, febrifuge. 

Uses : One of the dashmul roots; fever, asthma, TB 
and other lung diseases; kidney disorders, cough, 
constipation, fumigation for toothache; juice with 
whey for diuretic; root with chirdyatd and ginger 
as a febrifuge, berry juice for sore throat, juice with 
black pepper for rheumatism; decoction for gon¬ 
orrhea, conception; fruit powder with honey for 
chronic coughs in children; root decoction with 
guduchl for cough and fever. 

Preparation : Decoction, powder, juice, fumes 


pruiens) 
Part Used : 


Seeds, root, legumes 

Habitat : Annual climbing shrub common in the 
tropics of India; legumes are eaten as 
vegetable 

Energetics : Sweet-cold- sweet VP- K+ 

Tissues : Reproductive 
Systems : Nervous, reproductive 
Action : Anthelmintic, aphrodisiac, astringent, 
nervine, tonic, rejuvenative, (root is nervine/tonic) 
Uses : Seeds— Main herb for Parkinson’s. One 
of the best tonics and aphrodisiacs for the repro¬ 
ductive system. Indigestion, colic, debility, edema, 
impotence, infertility, leukorrhea, menorrhagia, 
roundworm, spermatorrhea. Generally, it is used 
with dmalakl, ashwagandhd, shatdvari, gokshura, 
white and black musali to make pills and jellies. 
Roots—fevers, edema, elephantiasis (externally), 
nervous disorders, including facial paralysis. 
Precautions : Do not use when congested 
Preparation : Decoction, powder, confections 


Sanskrit : Katuka 

+ 4+1 

sD 



































The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Hindi : Kutki, Katki 
English : None 

Latin : Picrorrhiza kurroa Benth. 

Part Used : Dried rhizome 

Habitat : North -Western Himalayas, from Kash¬ 
mir to Sikkim 
Energetics : Bitter PK- V+ 

Tissues : Plasma, blood, marrow/nerves, female re¬ 
productive 

Systems : Excretory, female reproductive, digestive, 
circulatory, nervous. 

Action : Small doses—bitter stomachic and laxa¬ 
tive; large doses—cathartic; anti-periodic, chola- 
gogue 

Uses : Metal toxicity, liver, epilepsy, paralysis, em- 
menagogue, emetic, abortifacient, skin diseases, 
improves eye sight, bilious fever, constipation due 
to small intestine secretion; with equal parts lico¬ 
rice, raisins, neem bark; with aromatics for worms 
in children, fever, malaria. 

Preparation : Tincture, extract, powder, pills 


Sanskrit : Kuman (Ghirita) 

Tariff 

Hindi : Kumari, 

Gawarpaltra 
English : Indian 
Alces, Aloe Vera 
Latin : Aloe 

barbadensis Mill., 

Aloe Indica, A. 

Barbados, A. 

Vera, Varieties: 

Officinalis 
(Liliaceae) 

Part Used : Ex¬ 
tract, dried juice of 
leaves and pulp 
root 

Habitat : Throughout India and the world 
Energetics : Bitter, astringent, pungent, sweet/cold/ 
sweet VPK= (gel and small doses of powder; pow¬ 
der—PK- V+ 

Tissues: All 


Systems : Circulatory, female reproductive, diges¬ 
tive, nervous, excretory 

Action : In small doses—stomachic tonic; large 
doses—purgative, emmenagogue, anthelmintic; 
laxative, refrigerant, bitter tonic, alterative, vulner¬ 
ary, rejuvenative. Aperient, digestive, alterative, 
astringent; stems, fruits, flowers—bitter, carmina¬ 
tive; root—diuretic, expectorant, febrifuge. 

Uses : Intestinal worms, hair dye and growth; eye 
problems, colds, hemorrhoids (confection of leaf 
pulp); pulp with honey and turmeric —coughs and 
colds; juice with asafoetida gum—colic, infant 
pneumonia; external leaf juice for skin inflamma¬ 
tions and chronic ulcers, brain tonic, Anti-Vayu 
rib pain, heart pain, swellings from injury, enlarged 
spleen (internal and external paste); tender leaves 
with cumin and rock candy— dysentery with 
bloody stools; juice and ginger oil—hair oil for 
insomnia; leaf pulp— conjunctivitis; with small 
amounts of rock candy and cooked alum (in fry¬ 
ing pan)— ophthalmia; with butter—applied to 
skin ulcers to relieve burning sensation; with tur¬ 
meric —spleen disorders and enlarged glands; tu¬ 
ber paste with turmeric paste—externally applied 
to inflamed or diseased breasts; fever, constipa¬ 
tion, bursitis, jaundice, hepatitis, enlarged liver, 
venereal diseases, herpes, amenorrhea, dysmenor¬ 
rhea, menopause, vaginitis, tumors, regulates fat 
and sugar metabolism; blood tonic, tones diges¬ 
tive enzymes, kidney disorders, asthma, TB and 
other lung diseases, ear infections, obesity, Pitta 
reducing, wasting diseases. Externally for burns, 
herpes, skin rashes, sores. One of the dashmul 
roots. Fumigation for toothache; juice with whey 
for diuretic; root with chirdyatd and ginger as a 
febrifuge, berry juice for sore throat, juice with 
black pepper for rheumatism; decoction for gon¬ 
orrhea, conception; fruit powder with honey for 
chronic coughs in children; root decoction with 
guduchl for cough and fever. 

Precaution : Do not use when pregnant 
Preparation : Confection, tincture, lotion, juice 
(gel), powder, decoction, paste, pulp, herbal wine, 
fumes , | 

- * 

































Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 4: Herbology 


Sanskrit : Kum Kuma 

O S3 

Hindi : Zaffran, 

Kesar 

English : Saffron 
Latin : Crocus 
sativus Linn. (C. 
saffron) 

Part Used : Dried 
stigmas 

Habitat : Com¬ 
mon wild dwarf- 
flower in India, 

U.S. and else¬ 
where 

Energetics : Pungent, bitter, sweet-cold-sweet 
VPK= 

Tissues : All, especially the blood 
Systems : Circulatory, digestive, female reproduc¬ 
tive, nervous 

Action : Alterative, antispasmodic, aphrodisiac, 
carminative, emmenagogue, rejuvenative, stimu¬ 
lant, stomachic 

Uses : Amenorrhea, anemia, asthma, cold, cough, 
depression, diarrhea, dysmenorrhea, hysteria, fe¬ 
male reproductive blood circulator, food assimila¬ 
tion, impotence, infertility, headache, G.I. disor¬ 
ders, leukorrhea, menstrual pain and irregularity; 
liver enlargement/regulator, lumbago, menopause, 
neuralgia, Pitta reducer, rheumatism; seminal 
weakness, spleen regulator, tissue growth stimu¬ 
lator of the reproductive systems, uterus toner. 
Spiritual Uses : Sattwic, develops love, compassion, 
and devotion 


Precautions : Do not use when pregnant; large doses 
is narcotic 

Preparation : Infusion, milk decoction, powder 

Sanskrit: Kusha 


S3 



Hindi : Durba 

English : Sacred Creeping Grass 
Latin : Eragrostis cynosuriodes Beauv. 

Part Used : Grass, root 

Habitat : Grows wild throughout the Himalayas 

Energetics : Astringent 

Tissues : Plasma, reproductive 

Systems : Reproductive, urinary 

Action : Grass—hemostatic, coagulant, diuretic; 

[note: even local grasses (without chemicals 

sprayed on them) are useful] 

Uses : Root—dysentery, menorrhagia, other bleed¬ 
ing disorders like hemorrhoids, purpura, etc. 
Preparation : Infusion 





































The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Sanskrit : Kushtha 

S3 



Hindi : Kut 

English : Costus, Kut Root 
Latin : Saussurea lappa Clarke. 

Part Used : Root 

Habitat : Himalayas, Kashmir Valley 
Energetics : Pungent, Bitter-hot-rasayana VPK= 
Tissues : Plasma, Blood, Bone 
Systems : Circulatory, respiratory 
Action : Anthelmintic, antiseptic, aphrodisiac, as¬ 
tringent, antispasmodic, alterative, aromatic, car¬ 
minative, diuretic, expectorant, insecticidal, pro¬ 
phylactic, stimulant, tonic 
Uses : Best for bronchial asthma (especially vago¬ 
tonic), gas, phlegm, wasting, cough, loss of hun¬ 
ger (dyspepsia), rib pain, edema, skin diseases, 
jaundice, all diseases due to Vayu and Kapha, and 
asthma; rheumatism (with choti ela), cholera, qua¬ 
train malaria, leprosy, persistent hiccup, blackens 
gray hair; with musk for toothache, hair wash. As 
an ointment it is applied externally to wounds, se¬ 
vere ulcerations, tumors, angina. 

Preparation : Powder, paste 

Precaution : Narcotic effects when smoked. Use 

only under supervision of a qualified practitioner 



Habitat : Tropical and subtropical India (From Sind 
and Punjab to South India and Sri Lanka) 
Energetics : Very pungent, astringent-hot VK- P+ 
Tissues : Plasma, fat, reproductive 
Systems : Urinary, digestive, excretory, female re¬ 
productive 

Action : Mild stomachic, bitter tonic, diuretic, 
lithotriptic 

Uses : Fever, diarrhea, dysentery, acid indigestion, 
edema, kidney inflammation, Bright’s Disease, 
chronic cystitis, urethral discharge, urinary and 
bladder diseases, later stages of bowel complaints 
(taken with aromatics like cardamom); leaves and 
root paste with bland oil—topically for sores, si¬ 
nuses, and itches. Recipe for colic; 4 parts laghu 
pata : 5 parts pepper: 3 parts asafetida : 6 parts gin¬ 
ger; mix and add honey to make into a pill. The 
dose is three to five grains. 

Preparation : Decoction, powder, extract 


Sanskrit : Mamira, Mishamitita 

BFftTT, 


Sanskrit : Laghu Pata, Jal Jamm 

vfH Midi, jET rtHdl 

Hindi : Patha, Harjori 
English : Velvet Leaf 
Latin : Cissampelos pareira Linn. 
Part Used : Root, bark, leaves 


Hindi : Mamira 
English : Gold Thread 
Latin : Coptis teeta all. 

Part Used : Dried root 

Habitat : Himalayas, Mishmi mountains east of 
Upper Assam 

Energetics : Bitter-cold-pungent PK- V+ 

Tissues : Plasma, blood, fat 
Systems : Digestive, circulatory 
Action : Bitter tonic, antipyretic, alterative 











































Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 4: Herbology 




Uses : Improves appetite, restores digestion, gas, 
visceral obstructions, jaundice, improves bile flow, 
chronic gall bladder inflammation, debility, con¬ 
valescence after fevers, debilitating diseases, atonic 
indigestion, mild forms of intermittent fevers, ca¬ 
tarrhal and rheumatic conjunctivitis, dries exces¬ 
sive body moisture (e.g., water retention), all Pitta 
disorders, anal fissure, ulcerative colitis, vaginal 
infections, tumors, boils, carbuncles, inflammatory 
skin conditions; externally applied to sores (includ¬ 
ing mouth sores). Preparation: Paste, eye salve, 
powder, infusion, 
extract 

Precaution : Drying; do not use with nausea or vom¬ 
iting caused by a stomach hypoactivity or diarrhea 
due to spleen or kidney deficiency. Long term use 
aggravates the spleen and stomach 


Sanskrit : Manjishtha 

*rfwT 

Hindi : Manjit 
English : Indian Mad¬ 
der 

Latin : Rubia 

cordifolia Linn. (R. 
manjishta, R. se- 
cunda) 

Part Used : Root 
Habitat : A climbing 
plant found in the 
North- West 


Himalayas, Nilgiris and other hilly districts of In¬ 
dia 

Energetics : Bitter, sweet-cold-pungent PK- V+ 
Tissues: Plasma, blood, muscles 
Systems : Circulatory, female reproductive 
Action : Alterative, antitumor, astringent, diuretic, 
emmenagogue, hemostatic, lithotriptic 
Uses : The best herb for blood purification. Blood 
circulation, controls bleeding, mends broken bones, 
amenorrhea, cancer, cleanses and regulates liver, 
spleen, pancreas, and kidneys; diarrhea, dysentery, 
dysmenorrhea, edema, destroys kidney and gall 
stones, heart disease, hepatitis, herpes, jaundice, 
menopause, menorrhagia, painful menstruation, 
post partum uterus stimulation, paralysis, skin 
problems, tissue healing, traumatic injuries, skel¬ 
etal disease, Kapha disorders, joint pain, rheuma¬ 
toid arthritis, improves complexion and voice, 
helps destroy benign and malignant tumors. 
Precautions: Severe chills, aggravates Vayu 
Preparation: Decoction, powder, paste, ghee 


Sanskrit : Maricha (meaning: sun due to its large 
amounts of solar energy) 

HfUT 

Hindi : Gulmirch 
English : Black 
Pepper 
Latin: 


Piper 

nigrum Linn. 

Part Used : Dried 
unripe fruit 
Habitat : Peren- 0 
nial climbing 
shrub is found 
throughout India m 

Energetics : Pun- 
gent-hot-pungent VK- P+ 

Tissues : Plasma, blood, fat, marrow, nerve 
Systems : Digestive, circulatory, respiratory 
Action : Stimulant, expectorant, carminative, anti¬ 
pyretic, anthelmintic, antiperiodic; externally — 
rubefacient, stimulant, resolvent 
Uses : Asthma, chronic indigestion, colon toxins, 
obesity, sinus congestion, fever, intermittent fever, 

f 95 

































The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


cold extremities, colic, cooking spice, cholera, 
gastric ailments, gas, diarrhea, hemorrhoids, 
worms, sore throat; externally—applied as a paste 
to boils, s ki n diseases. 

Preparation : Infusion, powder, milk decoction, 
medicated ghee 

Precaution : Digestive inflammations, high Pitta 


Sanskrit : Musta, Mustaka 

sD 9 O 

Hindi : Mutha 
English : Nutgrass 
Latin : Cyperus 

rotundus Linn. 

Part Used : Rhizome 
Found 
the 


Sanskrit : Nagkeshar HFI%^R 




Habitat : 
throughout 
plains of India (espe¬ 
cially South India) 

Energetics : Pungent, 
bitter, astringent- 
cold-pungent PK- 
(V+ in excess) 

Tissues : Plasma, 
blood, muscle, mar¬ 
row/nerve 

Systems : Digestive, circulatory, female reproduc¬ 
tive 

Action : Alterative, anthelmintic, antifungal, anti- 
parasitic, antirheumatic, antispasmodic, aphrodi¬ 
siac, astringent, carminative, demulcent, dia¬ 
phoretic, diuretic, emmenagogue, stimulant, sto¬ 
machic 

Uses : Best herb for PMS, yeast, and Candida. 

Parasites, menopause, menstrual disorders (includ¬ 
ing pain and cramps), dysmenorrhea, diarrhea, 
dysentery, fevers, gastritis, indigestion, liver (slug¬ 
gish) harmonizes the liver, spleen, and pancreas; 
malabsorption, colic, bloody stool, urine, and vom¬ 
iting blood, promotes memory, convulsions, 
moodiness, and depression, increases appetite, 
palpitation, vomiting, colds, flu, mucus, reduces 
breast tumors, lowers high blood pressure. 
Precautions : Constipation and excess Vayu 
Preparation : Decoction, powder 


Hindi : Nagakesara 
English : Cobra’s Saffron 

Latin : Mesua ferrea Linn. (M. Roxburghii, M. 
coromandalina 

Part Used : Flower buds, flowers, fruit, seed, root, 
bark, oil 

Habitat : Throughout India 

Energetics : dried blossoms, root and bark—bitter; 
bark—mild astringent; dried flowers and blos¬ 
soms—astringent; fruit skin—astringent 
Tissues : Plasma 

Systems : Respiratory, digestive, excretory 
Action : Root—aromatic, sudorific 
Bark—aromatic, sudorific, 

Bark oleo-resin—aromatic, demulcent 
Unripe fruit—aromatic, acrid, purgative 
Fresh blossoms —stomachic, bitter, aromatic, su¬ 
dorific 

Dried flowers—stomachic, stimulant, carminative 
Uses : Leaves—poultice for head colds. Bark and 
root—decoction, infusion, or tincture for gastritis 
and bronchitis. Seed Oil—externally for skin con¬ 
ditions (e.g., wounds, sore, etc.), and rheumatism. 
Dried flowers—oil or decoction fragrance; as a 
powdered paste or with ghee, they are used for 
bleeding hemorrhoids and dysentery with mucus. 
Flowers are also used for thirst, excessive perspi¬ 
ration, expectorating cough, indigestion. 






































Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 4: Herbology 


Sanskrit: Nimba 



Hindi : Nimb 
English : Neem 

Latin : Melia azadirachta Linn. (Azadiracta Indica) 
Part Used : All 

Habitat : This tree grows wild in Iran, the Western 
Himalayas of India, and is cultivated in other parts 
of India 

Energetics : Bitter/astringent-cold-pungent PK- 
V++ 

Tissues : Plasma, blood, fat 

Systems : Circulatory, digestive, respiratory, urinary 

Action : 

Root bark—astringent, antiperiodic (prevent recur¬ 
rence of diseases), tonic 

Bark—astringent, antiperiodic, bitter, tonic, ver¬ 
mifuge, antiviral 

Lruit—purgative, emollient, anthelmintic 
Leaves—discutient, emmenagogue, antiviral, dis¬ 
infectant 

Juice—anthelmintic 

Nut Oil—local stimulant, insecticide, antiseptic 
Llowers—stimulant, tonic, stomachic 
Uses : Arthritis, blood purifier and detoxifier, con¬ 
valescence after fever, cough, diabetes, eczema, 
fever (used with black pepper and gentian), inflam¬ 
mation of muscles and joints, jaundice, leukorrhea, 
malaria, mucus membrane ulcerations, nausea, 
obesity, parasites, rheumatism, skin diseases/in¬ 


flammations, cleanses liver, syphilis, thirst, tissue 
excess, tumors, vomiting, worms, drowsiness, loss 
of appetite. Leaves—heal ulcers in urinary passage, 
emmenagogue, skin diseases. Lruit—skin diseases, 
bronchitis. Kernel powder —washing hair. Effec¬ 
tive as a pesticide. 

Precautions : Causes harshness for people on spiri¬ 
tual paths, Not with emaciation 
Preparation : Infusion, decoction, powder, medi¬ 
cated ghee, or oil 


Sanskrit : Nirgundi 



Hindi : Sambhalu 

English : Live Leafed Chaste Tree 

Latin : Vitex negundo Linn. 

Part Used : Roots, root, flowers, leaves, bark 
Habitat : Bengal, Southern India, Himalayas; 
Burma (Myanmar) 

Energetics : Leaves—bitter; flowers—cold, astrin¬ 
gent P- V+ (K+ in excess) 

Tissues: Plasma, blood, marrow/nerve, reproduc¬ 
tive 

Systems : Circulatory, female reproductive, nervous 
Action : Leaves—antiparasitical, alterative, aro¬ 
matic, vermifuge, pain reliever. Root—tonic, feb¬ 
rifuge, expectorant, diuretic. Lruit—nervine, 
cephalic, emmenagogue. Dried fruit—vermifuge 
Uses : Hair, eyes, colic, swelling, worms, nausea, 
ulcers, ear disorders, malaria, hemorrhoids, spleen, 
uterus, removes obstructions, hemicrania. Exter¬ 
nal: leaves— inflammatory joint swellings in acute 
rheumatism and of the testes from suppressed gon¬ 
orrhea or gonorrheal epididymitis and orchitits; 
sprained limbs, contusions, bites (used as heated 


& 




























The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


leaves or as a poultice). Pillows stuffed with leaves 
are slept on to remove catarrh and headache (they 
are also smoked for relief). Crushed leaves or poul¬ 
tice is applied to temples for headaches. As a plas¬ 
ter on the spleen, it removes swelling; as a juice 
discharges worms from ulcers. A juice oil is ap¬ 
plied to sinuses and neck gland sores (scrofula), 
or for washing the head for glandular tubercular 
neck swellings. Oil is also good for syphilis, vene¬ 
real diseases, and other syphilitic skin disorders. 
A leaf decoction with pippall is used for catarrhal 
fever with heaviness of head and dull hearing. A 
warm bath in a leaf decoction removes pains after 
childbirth. For rheumatism it is taken as a juice, 
with the juice of tulsl and bhringaraj (eclipta alba), 
mixed with crushed ajwan seeds; or these persons 
can bathe in a nirgundl leaf decoction. A tincture 
of root-bark is good for irritable bladder and also 
rheumatism. Powdered root—good for hemor¬ 
rhoids and as a demulcent for dysentery. Root— 
dyspepsia, colic, rheumatism, worms, boils, skin 
disorders. Flowers—diarrhea, cholera, fever, liver 
disorders, cardiac tonic; seeds—cold for skin dis¬ 
orders; flowers and stalk powder—for blood dis¬ 
charge from stomach and bowels. 

Preparation : Fruit powder—sugar/water or honey 
paste, decoction; powder, tincture, decoction, poul¬ 
tice 


Sanskrit: Pashana Bheda 





Hindi : Pakhanbed, Dakachru 
English : None 

Fatin: Saxifraga ligulata Wall. 

Part Used : Rhizome 

Habitat : Found in temperate the areas of the 
Himalayas, from Bhutan to Kashmir and the 
Khassia Mountains. 

Energetics : Astringent, sweet-cold-sweet PK-V+ 
Tissues : Plasma, fat, female reproductive 
Systems : Female reproductive, urinary 
Action : Astringent, demulcent, diuretic, lithotrip- 
tic 

Uses : Best herb for dissolving uric acid, urinary 
stones/gravel (especially phosphate; also oxalate); 
cough, diarrhea, safer (less irritating) diuretic, fe¬ 
vers, vaginal diseases, Vayu tumors, pulmonary 
teething irritation, scurvy, tumors, enlarged pros¬ 
tate. External —paste for boils. 

Precautions : Amenorrhea 
Preparation : Decoction, powder, paste 


Sanskrit : Pippall 

Fwfl 





Hindi : Pippall, Pipal 

English : Fong Pepper, Dried Catkins 

Fatin : Piper longum Finn. 

Part Used : Fruit 

Habitat : Indigenous to North-Eastern and South¬ 
ern India; Sri Fanka, cultivated in Eastern Bengal 
Energetics : Pungent-hot-sweet VK- P+ 

Tissues: All but bone 


a** vs. 




























Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 4: Herbology 


Systems : Digestive, reproductive, respiratory 
Action : Analgesic, anthelmintic, aphrodisiac, car¬ 
minative, expectorant 

Uses : Abdominal tumors and distention, to improve 
the digestive fire, Kapha disorders, asthma, bron¬ 
chitis, colds, coughs, epilepsy, flatulence, gout, 
laryngitis, paralysis, rheumatic pain, sciatica, 
worms, immune system, for ama. 

Spiritual Uses : Sattwic 
Precautions : Causes high Pitta 
Preparation : Infusion, powder, oil 


headache, weakness, and debility. It is also used 
in tooth powders as an astringent. Praval pishti — 
for ulcers. 

Preparation: Ash powder 


Sanskrit : Praval 
sranFi 



Sanskrit : Punarnava, Raktpunarnava (red) [see 
also S hweta punarnarva (white)] 

wfaT 


Hindi : Parvara 

English : Red Coral 

Latin : Corallium rubrum 

Part Used : Shell 

Habitat : Oceans, seas, and gulfs 

Energetics : Its red color is due to large amounts of 

iron content. Best for Pitta; VPK= 

Tissues : Plasma, blood, fat, muscle, reproductive 
Systems : Digestive, nervous, excretory, respiratory, 
circulatory, reproductive 

Action : Antacid, astringent, nervine tonic, laxative, 
diuretic, emetic, antibilious 
Uses : Best source of easily digestible calcium, 
osteoporosis. It is mainly used for coughs, wast¬ 
ing, asthma, low fever, urinary diseases, carbuncles, 
scrofula, spermatorrhea, gonorrhea and other geni¬ 
tal inflammation with mucus discharge. Other main 
uses include nerve headaches, giddiness, and ver¬ 
tigo. Also, it is used for chronic bronchitis, pul¬ 
monary tuberculosis, vomiting, dyspepsia, bilious 


Hindi : Beshakapore, Lai Punarnava 
English : Red Hogweed, Spreading Hogweed 
Latin : Boerhavia diffusa Linn. 

Part Used : Herb, root 

Habitat : Throughout India, especially during the 
rainy season 

Energetics : Red—bitter-cold-pungent 
Tissues : Plasma, blood, muscle, fat, marrow/ 
nerves, reproductive. 

Systems : Digestive, female reproductive, circula¬ 
tory, respiratory, nervous. 

Action : Bitter, stomachic, laxative, diuretic, expec¬ 
torant, rejuvenative, diaphoretic, emetic 
Root—purgative, anthelmintic, febrifuge; White— 
laxative, diaphoretic; Red—vermifuge. 

Uses : A main herb for kidney stones. 

White—edema, anemia, heart disease, cough, in¬ 
testinal colic, kidney disorders; same uses as red. 
Red—nervous system, heart disease, hemorrhoids, 
s ki n diseases, edema, rat and snake bites; chronic 
alcoholism, wasting diseases, insomnia, rheuma¬ 
tism, eye diseases, asthma (moderate doses), in¬ 
duces vomiting in large doses, jaundice, ascites due 
to early liver and peritoneal concerns; urethritis. 
Leaf juice— jaundice; Root—decoction or infu¬ 
sion as a laxative, gonorrhea, internal inflamma¬ 
tions; Externally—edema, rat and snake bites. Leaf 




































The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


juice with honey, dropped into the eyes for chronic 
ophthalmia. 

Preparation : Juice, decoction, infusion, powder, 
paste, oil, sugar water, or honey paste 


Sanskrit : Rasonam (lacking one tastcj/Lashuna 

o 



Hindi : LaShan 

English : Garlic 

Latin : Allium sativum Linn. 

Part Used : Bulb and oil 

Habitat : Cultivated all over India, the U.S. and other 
countries 

Energetics : All except sour; pungent-hot-pungent 
VK- P+ 

Tissues : All 

Systems : Circulatory, digestive, nervous, reproduc¬ 
tive, respiratory 

Action : Alterative, anthelmintic, antiparasitic, an- 
tispasmodic, aphrodisiac, carminative, disinfectant, 
expectorant, rejuvenative, stimulant 
Uses : Arteriosclerosis, asthma, blood and lymph 
cleanser (anti-dma); nerve and bone tissue 
rasayana (rejuvenative); cholesterol, colds, colic, 
convulsions, cough, detoxifier, ear problems (ex¬ 
ternal use), edema, flu, gas, heart disease, hemor¬ 
rhoids, hypertension, hysteria, impotence, indiges¬ 
tion, lung/bronchial antiseptic and antispasmodic, 
memory, paralysis, rheumatism, skin diseases, 
T.B., tremor, tumors, Vayu fevers, Vayu/Kapha 
rasayana, worms (round). Used effectively on 
parasites in dogs. Spiritual Uses: It is tamasic, and 
only suggested as medicine; not as a food for the 
healthy. Harltakl is its spiritual substitute. 


Precautions : Hyperacidity, toxic blood heat, excess 
Pitta, cause mental dullness, not for spiritual devo¬ 
tees—except as medicine. 

Preparation : Juice, infusion (don’t boil), powder, 
medicated oil. 


Sanskrit : Rechanaka, Raktang 



Hindi : Kamala 
English : Kamala 

Latin : Mallotus philippinensis Muell, Arg. (Cro¬ 
ton philippinesis, C. punctatus, C. coccineum 
(Glandulae rottlerae) 

Part Used : Glands and hairs from the capsules or 
fruits 

Habitat : This small evergreen shrub of the Spurge 

family is found all over India, Sri Lanka, East 

Indies, Malay Archipelago, Australia, and more. 

Energetics : VPK=, P 

Tissues : All, blood 

Systems : Digestive, excretory 

Action : Cathartic, anthelmintic, aphrodisiac, lithot- 

riptic 

Uses : Tapeworms, aperient, purgative (may cause 
nausea or gripping before purging, but no after¬ 
effects; good for children, adults, and pets. 
Preparation : Ripe fruits are placed in a cloth and 
beaten until the glandular pubescence is removed; 
or fruits are rubbed between one’s palms or feet. 




































Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 4: Herbology 


Sanskrit : Salam-mishn 

Hindi : 

Salabmishri 
English : Salep 
Orchid 
Latin : Orchis 
mascula Linn. 

(O. latifolia, O. 

Laxiflora, Allium 
Macleani) 

Part Used : Root 
Habitat : Iran, Af¬ 
ghanistan 
Energetics : 

Sweet/sweet/ 
sweet P 

Tissues : Blood, marrow/nerve, reproductive 
Systems : Nervous, reproductive, excretory 
Action : Restorative/invigorative tonic 
Uses : Wasting diseases, diabetes, chronic diarrhea, 
dysentery, nervous or sexual debility, hemiplegia, 
paralysis, general weakness, impotence. 
Preparation : One teaspoon of powdered root to one 
cup of boiled mi lk 

Precaution : Avoid chilies, acids, very spicy foods, 
intoxicants, staying awake through the night, and 
sexual acts, when taking this herb 


Part Used : Root, milk, stalk, leaves 

Habitat : A climbing plant throughout India; in the 

Himalayas under 5,000 feet. 

Energetics : Sweet, bitter-cold-sweet P- VK+ 

Tissues : Plasma, blood, marrow/nerves 

Systems : Circulatory, nervous 

Action : The root is an alterative tonic, diuretic, 

diaphoretic 

Uses : Stalks and leaves—decoction for skin erup¬ 
tions, hearing disorders, fevers. Root decoction — 
skin diseases, syphilis, elephantiasis, loss of sen¬ 
sation, hemiplegia, loss of appetite, blood purifier, 
kidney and urinary disorders. It is best taken with 
other herbs. 

Preparation : Decoction, powder, pills 


Sanskrit : Sarpa-gandha (serpentine species) 

*P$-*F*J 





Sanskrit : Sariva 


Hindi : Kalisar, Dudhilata, Sugandhi 
English : Black Creeper, Sarsaparilla 
Latin : Ichnocarpus fruitescens (Apocymene 
frutescens, Echites frutscens) 


Hindi : Nakuli, Chota-chand 
English : None 

Latin : Rauwolfia serpentina Benth. 

Part Used : Root 

Habitat : Climbing shrub in tropical Himalayas; 
moderate altitudes in Sikkim, North Bihar, Patna, 
Bhagalpur, Assam, Pegu, Tenasserim, Deccan Pen¬ 
insula, Sri Lanka, Java, Malay 
Energetics : Root—bitter 
Tissues : Plasma, blood, marrow/nerves 
Systems : Excretory, nervous, circulatory, respira¬ 
tory 

Action : Bitter tonic, sedative, febrifuge 
Uses : It contains Reserpine alkaloid which is used 
for hypertension. This is the main herb for high 
blood pressure. Insanity with violent maniacal 









































The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 




Hindi : Shankhini 
English : None 

Latin : Canscora decussata Roem. etc. Sch. 

Part Used : Entire plant and juice 

Habitat : Found throughout India and Burma 

(Myanmar) 

Energetics : Bitter-hot-pungent VPK= 

Tissues : Nerves 

Systems : Mind, nervous 

Action : Alterative, nervine 

Uses : One of the main Ayurvedic nervines with 

brdhml, jatdmdnshi, and vacha. Juice for epilepsy, 

insanity, nervousness, memory. 

Preparation : Juice, infusion, decoction, powder, 
paste 


Hindi : Shatavarl 
English : Hundred Husbands 
Latin : Asparagus racemosus Willd. (A. 
sarmentosus, Willd; A. gonoclados, Baker; A. 
adscendens, Roxb.) 

Part Used : Root 

Habitat : This climber is found in the jungles around 
8,000 feet throughout India, especially Northern 
India 

Energetics : Sweet, bitter-cold-sweet PV- (K, dma 
+ in excess) 

Tissues : All Systems: Circulatory, digestive, repro¬ 
ductive, respiratory 

Action : Mucilaginous, antidiarrhetic, refrigerant, 
diuretic, antidysenteric, nutritive, tonic, demulcent, 
galactagogue, aphrodisiac, antispasmodic, sto¬ 
machic 

Uses : A main herb for the immune and female 
reproductive systems. Cancer, convalescence, 
female organ debility, sexual debility, leukorrhea, 
menopause, impotence, infertility, cough, dehydra¬ 
tion, diarrhea, dysentery, fevers (chronic), 
hematemesis, herpes, hyperacidity, lung abscess, 
ulcers, rheumatism, soothes dry, inflamed mem¬ 
branes of kidneys, lungs, sexual organs, and stom¬ 
ach. External application—emollient for stiff joints 
and neck, and muscle spasms. Increases breast mi lk 
and semen, nurtures mucous membranes, blood 
cleanser, supplies female hormones, nourishes the 


symptoms (doses; 20-30 grains of root powder), 
insomnia, insect stings, dysentery, painful bowel 
disorders, fevers, insanity, sedative, hypochondria, 
irritative conditions of the CNS (central nervous 
system); leaf juice—in eyes heals cornea opaci¬ 
ties. 

Preparation : Decoction, powder, pills 
Precautions : Lethal in large doses; not yet allowed 
in the U.S. Prolonged use over 10 years can cause 
sterility 


Sanskrit : Shatavari, Shatamuh 

Cs 


Sanskrit : Shankh Pushpi 
HHl 
































Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 4: Herbology 


ovum. Immune system boost—good for AIDS, 
Epstein Barr, etc., cancer—strengthens one from 
and for chemotherapy. 

Spiritual Uses : Sattwic, increases love and devo¬ 
tion, increases ojas 

Precautions : Do not use if congested or with dma 
Preparation : Decoction, powder, ghee , oil; for se¬ 
rious diseases like cancer, use one or more ounces 
daily. 


Sanskrit : Shilajit (meaning: sweat of the rock) 

feHlfjfd 



Hindi : Shilajita 


English : Mineral Pitch; Vegetable Asphalt 
Latin : Asphaltum 

Part Used : The oozing from the rocks 
Habitat : Himalayas, near the source of the holy 
Ganga river 

Energetics : Pungent, bitter, hot-pungent VPK=, P+ 
in excess 
Tissues : All 

Systems : All, especially the urinary and nervous 
Action : Alterative, diuretic, lithotriptic, antiseptic, 
rejuvenative 

Uses : The main tridoshic immune-boosting herb 
(with Guduchi). A main herb for diabetes. Espe¬ 
cially useful as a Vayu tonic and rejuvenative, aph¬ 
rodisiac, and for the kidneys; kidney, and gall 
stones, obesity, jaundice, dysuria, cystitis, edema, 
hemorrhoids, sexual debility, menstrual disorders, 
asthma, epilepsy, insanity, skin diseases, parasites, 
heals broken bones, mental work. Of the varieties 
of shilajit, the black is used for healing. Although 


it is expensive in comparison to herbs, it can heal 
most diseases. 

Production : In the Himalayan region known as 
Gangotri (the northern region of the Ganga river), 
shilajit drips from the rocks. In other areas, foot- 
long scorpions sting the rocks. The poison from 
their stingers causes the shilajit to ooze from the 
stones. In still other places, it appears in coagu¬ 
lated form. Monkeys use this natural remedy for 
various health ailments. They stay healthy and live 
a long time 

Precautions : Do not use with high uric acid count, 
or with febrile diseases 

Preparation : Powder, with milk. 1 oz or more a 
day for severe diseases; 1/4-1 tsp.- 3 times daily, 
otherwise 



Sanskrit : Shweta Musali 


Hindi : Safeta Musali 

English : White Musali 

Latin : Asparagus adscendens Roxb. 

Part Used : Tuberous root or rhizome 
Habitat : Western Himalayas, Punjab, Gujarat, 
Bombay, Oudh, Central India 
Energetics : Sweet, bitter-cold-sweet VP- K+ 
Tissues : Reproductive 
Systems : Reproductive, respiratory 
Action : Demulcent, galactagogue, nutritive tonic 
Uses : Debility (general and sexual), diarrhea, leu- 
korrhea, spermatorrhea, wasting diseases. It helps 
during pregnancy and postpartum, nourishing fe¬ 
tus and increasing breast milk flow. A relative of 
shatdvari. 


. ig ^ 



































The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Precautions : Ama, congestion 

Preparation : Milk decoction, powder, confection 


Sanskrit : Snuhi, Thohar 

Hindi : Thohar 
English : Milk 

Hedge 

Latin : Euphorbia 
neriifolia Linn. (E. 
lingularia) 

Part Used : Stem 
juice, root 
Habitat : Leafless 
shrubs are found in 
Northern and Cen¬ 
tral India 

Energetics : Very 
hot VKP+ 

Tissues : Marrow/ 
nerves, plasma, fat, 

Systems : Nervous, 
excretory 

Action : Juice—purgative, expectorant; locally— 
rubefacient Root—antispasmodic 
Uses : Milky juice—cathartic to relieve earache, 
liver and spleen disorders, syphilis, edema, skin 
diseases, asthma, cough, remove warts (externally 
used), with soot of ghee lamp as an eye salve for 
ophthalmia; externally with ghee applied to ulcers 
and scabies; glandular swellings —prevents pus 
formation and oozing; with turmeric—applied to 
hemorrhoids. Mainly used externally. 

Preparation : Juice, powder, pill, syrup, paste, tinc¬ 
ture, decoction, salve 

Precaution : It is very irritant and strong alkalis use 
under the supervision of an Ayurvedic specialist 


Sanskrit : Tagara 

rFR 

Hindi : Tagar, Bala-tagra, Sugandh-bala 
English : Indian Valerian 




Latin : Valeriana wallichii DC. (V. leschenauitic, 
V. brunoniana) 

Part Used : Rhizome (root) 

Habitat : Himalayan temperate regions, Kashmir, 
Bhutan; Afghanistan 

Energetics : Bitter, pungent, sweet, astringent- hot- 
pungent VK- P+ 

Tissues : Plasma, muscle, marrow/nerve 
Systems : Nervous, digestive, respiratory Action: 
Stimulant, antispasmodic, stomachic, 
sedative, analeptic, carminative, nervine 
Uses : Diminishes irritability of the brain and spi¬ 
nal marrow; nervous cough, dysmenorrhea, palpi¬ 
tations, migraine, chronic skin disorders, gas, colic, 
vertigo, nervous debility, failing reflexes, spasms, 
menopausal spasms, menstrual cramps, G.I. fer¬ 
mentation, insomnia, delirium, neuralgia, convul¬ 
sions, nervous exhaustion, mental stress, and over¬ 
work; hysteria, epilepsy. One of the best herbs for 
Vayu nervous disorders; cleanses undigested tox¬ 
ins (ama) from the colon, blood, joints, and nerves; 
clears nerve channels from excess Vayu; fainting; 
mixed with calamus (vachd) it is less dulling (4:1). 
Its relative, jatdmdnshl, is tridoshic, also a seda¬ 
tive, but not tamasic spiritually dulling). 

Spiritual Uses : It is tamasic, not recommended for 
meditation 

Preparation : Infusion, decoction, powder, pills 
Precaution : Excessive use may dull the mind. Ex¬ 
cessive doses may cause central paralysis and other 
severe conditions. Use only under the supervision 
of a qualified practitioner 




































Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 4: Herbology 




Sanskrit : Tejbal, Tumbru 

7 vA 


Hindi : Tumbru 

English : Toothache Tree 

Latin : Zanthoxylum alatum Roxb. 

Part Used : Bark, carpels (ovule bearing leaf of pistil 
on a flower), carpels of fruits, seeds 
Habitat : Shrub common in the temperate 
Himalayas, 

Bhutan, Darjeeling 

Energetics : Sweet, bitter-cold-sweet P- VK+ 
Tissues : Plasma, blood, bone 
Systems : Excretory, circulatory, digestive, respi¬ 
ratory 

Action : Bark and seeds—aromatic tonic; branches, 
fruit and thorns—carminative, stomachic 
Uses : Bark and seeds—fever, indigestion, cholera; 
fruit, branches, and thorns are used to heal tooth¬ 
ache and other diseases of the teeth. Good for 
asthma, bronchitis, Kapha disorders. 

Preparation : Bark—infusion, decoction 


Sanskrit : Tila 
frFT 

Hindi: Til 


English : Sesame 
Latin : Sesamum indicum DC. (S. orientale, S. 
trifoliatum, S luteum) 

Part Used : Seed, oil, leaf. There are three variet¬ 
ies; black, white, red (or brown). White has most 
oil, black is best for healing 
Habitat : Small bush throughout India 
Energetics : Sweet-hot-sweet V- PK+ 

Tissues : All, especially bone 
Systems : Excretory, reproductive, urinary, respi¬ 
ratory 

Action : Seeds—laxative, emollient, demulcent, 
diuretic, promote ojas, nourishing, galactogogue, 
emmenagogue, nutritive tonic, rejuvenative. 
Leave s—demulcent 

Uses : Seeds—excellent rejuvenative tonic for Vayu 
doshas, bones and teeth; hemorrhoids, dysentery, 
constipation (decoction or sweets); decoction with 
linseed for cough, aphrodisiac; as a paste, with 
butter for bleeding hemorrhoids; powder for amen¬ 
orrhea, dysmenorrhea (and a warm hip bath with a 
handful of seeds placed in the water); poultice ap¬ 
plied externally to ulcers, bums, and scalds. Ap¬ 
plying the oil to the body and head is useful for 
Vayu doshas, calming, giving nutrition, antioxi¬ 
dant properties, dry skin, ulcers, oozing wounds, 
with equal parts of lime juice for burns and scalds, 
on eyelids for eye problems; cooking/frying. In¬ 
gesting oil—gonorrhea. Leaves— mucilage for 
dysentery, cholera infantum, etc. Decoction from 
leaves and root—hair wash, blackens hair, pro¬ 
motes hair growth. Sesame stalks are good food 
for cows. 

Spiritual Uses : Sattwic (holy)—good for yog is (up 
to one ounce daily) 


































The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Preparation : Decoction, sweets, paste, poultice, 
powder, medicated oil 

Precaution : Large doses may cause abortion; obe¬ 
sity, high Pitta 


Sanskrit : Trayman 

*WH'H 




Hindi : Vanpsa, Banaphsa 
English : Wild Violet 
Latin : Viola odorata Linn. 

Part Used : Llowers, root 

Habitat : An herb found in the Himalayas over 5,000 
feet 

Energetics : Llowers astringent; bitter-cold-bitter 
VPK= 

Tissues : Plasma, blood, reproductive 
Systems: Respiratory, excretory, female reproduc¬ 
tive, circulatory 

Action : Emetic, flowers—demulcent, diaphoretic, 
diuretic, aperient 

Uses : Decoction for cough, sneezing, flu, and other 
respiratory problems. Bile, lung disorders, rectum 
and uterus prolapse, stops oozing of pus, kidney 
and liver diseases; diaphoretic for pulmonary dis¬ 
orders, nauseating emetic, large doses—emetic, 
mixed with almond oil and senna syrup—excel¬ 
lent demulcent and aperient for children, petal 
syrup—infant coughs and chest tightness; flower 
infusion—fevers; root is emetic in larger doses. 
Preparation : Decoction, infusion, powder, pill, 
syrup 


Sanskrit : Tulsi (TulasI), Krishnamul 

Hindi : Kala 
TulasI 

English : Ba¬ 
sil, Holy Ba¬ 
sil 

Latin : 

O c i m u m 
Spp. or O. 

Sanctum or 
O. basilicum 
Part Used : 

Herb 
Habitat : 

Small herb 
found 
throughout 

India and cultivated near Hindu houses and temples 
Energetics : Pungent-hot-pungent VK- (P+ in ex¬ 
cess) 

Tissues : Plasma, blood, marrow/nerves, reproduc¬ 
tive 

Systems : Digestive, nervous, respiratory 
Action : Antibacterial, antiseptic, analgesic, antis- 
pasmodic, diaphoretic, febrifuge, nervine, vermi¬ 
fuge 

Uses : Coughs (including TB-caused), colds, ex¬ 
cellent for fevers, lung/respiratory problems 
(prcinavaha srotas )—liquefies phlegm, allergic 
bronchitis, asthma, eosinophilia. Abdominal dis¬ 
tention, absorption/bioavailability, arthritis, colon 
(air excess), memory, nasal/sinus congestion, si¬ 
nus headache (as snuff), blood and heart tonic; 
oxygenates the body, cleanses and clears the brain 
and nerves; strengthens nerve tissue, relieves de¬ 
pression and the effects of poisons; reduces pain, 
difficult urination, prevents the accumulation of fat 
in the body (especially for women after meno¬ 
pause), obstinate skin diseases, arthritis, rheuma¬ 
tism, first stages of many cancers, builds the im¬ 
mune system. Improves digestion and appetite and 
destroys dma, good for worms, empowers other 
herbs. It is chewed for gum infection. Tulsi con¬ 
tains trace mineral copper (organic form), needed 
to absorb iron. Helps prevent hair-loss and gray¬ 
ing. Oil is used for earaches. Reduces swellings. 
































Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 4: Herbology 


Purifies the air (when grown in the house—a natu¬ 
ral negative ion machine); it frees ozone from sun’s 
rays 

Spiritual Uses : Sattwic, opens heart and mind, gives 
love, devotion, faith, compassion, and clarity; sa¬ 
cred to Vishnu and Krshna\ cleanses the aura and 
gives Divine protection. It increases prana (life 
breath). One of the two most sacred plants in In¬ 
dia. It develops pure awareness 
Precautions : Excess Pitta 

Preparation : Juice, infusion, powder, ghee, sham¬ 
poo 

Sanskrit : Tvak 


Uses : Absorption, agni (digestive fire) promoting, 
breathing difficulties, bronchitis, colds, congestion, 
circulation, generates energy and blood, strength¬ 
ens one’s constitution, diarrhea, dysentery, edema, 
flu, gas, metabolic (spleen and pancreas) and heart 
strengthening, hiccup, indigestion, warms and 
strengthens the kidneys, liver problems, menor¬ 
rhagia, melancholy, muscle tension, for debilitat¬ 
ing pain of the waist, knees, backaches and head¬ 
aches; palpitations, toothache, uterine muscle fi¬ 
ber stimulant, nausea, vomiting. Assists uterine 
contractions during labor, menstrual pain from low 
metabolic function. External—headaches, pain. 
Spiritual Uses : Sattwic 
Precautions : Bleeding disorders, excess Pitta 
Preparation : Infusion, decoction, powder, oil 



Hindi : Dalchim, Daruchim 
English : Cinnamon 

Latin : Cinnamomum cassia Blume. (C. 
zeylanicum; C. saigonicum; C. aromaticum; C. 
laurus.) 

Part Used : Bark 

Habitat : Indigenous to Sri Lanka and Southern 
India 

Energetics : Pungent, sweet, astringent-hot-pungent 
VK- P+ 

Tissues : Plasma, blood, muscles, marrow/nerves 
Systems : Circulatory, digestive, respiratory, urinary 
Action : Alterative, analgesic, antibacterial, antifun¬ 
gal, antiseptic, antirheumatic, antispasmodic, aro¬ 
matic, astringent, carminative, demulcent, dia¬ 
phoretic, digestive, diuretic, expectorant, germi¬ 
cide, hemostatic, stimulant, stomachic 


Sanskrit : Vacha (meaning: speaking) 

3RT 

Hindi : Bach 
English : Calamus 
Latin : Acomus cala¬ 
mus Linn. 

Part Used : Rhizome 
Habitat : A semi- 
aquatic perennial 
cultivated in damp 
marshy places, or by 
the edge of lakes and 
streams in India and 
Burma (Myanmar) 

Energetics : Pungent, 
bitter, astringent-hot- 
pungent VK- P+ 

Tissues : Plasma, 
muscle, fat, marrow/nerve, reproductive 
Systems : Circulatory, digestive, nervous, reproduc¬ 
tive, respiratory 

Action : Antispasmodic, decongestant, emetic, ex¬ 
pectorant, nervine, rejuvenative, stimulant 
Uses : Arthritis, asthma, brain rejuvenation, cere¬ 
bral circulation promoter, colds, coma (as snuff), 
cough, deafness, detoxifies subtle channels, emetic, 
epilepsy, hysteria, insanity, memory, mental sharp¬ 
ness, nasal congestion, and polyps (as snuff); ner¬ 
vous system rejuvenation, neuralgia, shock (as 


































The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


snuff), sinus headaches/sinusitis, transmutes sexual 
energy to spiritual energy; gastritis, colic pain, lar¬ 
yngitis, Vayu and Kapha rejuvenator. One of the 
best mind herbs. It removes the toxic effects of 
marijuana from the liver and brain. External—paste 
applied to head for headaches and arthritic joint 
pain. Powder may be sprinkled in home for removal 
of insects, fleas; keeps moths from woolens. 
Spiritual Uses : Sattwic 

Precautions : Not to be used with bleeding disor¬ 
ders (e.g., nosebleeds, hemorrhoids) and other 
Pitta conditions. Excess use may cause nausea, 
vomiting, rashes, and other Pitta conditions. 
Preparation : Decoction, milk decoction, powder, 
paste 


Sanskrit : Vamsha (Lochana) 



Hindi : VamSh Lochan, Bans 
English : Bamboo Manna 

Latin : Bumbusa arundinacia Retz. (B. apous, B. 
orientalls, B. spinosa) 

Part Used : [Two varieties (blue, white)] Inner stalks 
or stems of female plant (silicous deposit)/ milky 
bark; leaves, young shoots, seeds, roots 
Habitat : Himalayas; 4,000 feet, and throughout 
India 


Energetics : Sweet, astringent-cold-sweet PV- K+ 
Tissues : Plasma, blood, marrow/nerve 
Systems : Circulatory, nervous, respiratory 
Action : Demulcent, expectorant, tonic, 
rejuvenative, antispasmodic, hemostatic; leaves— 
emmenagogue, anthelmintic; stimulant, febrifuge, 
tonic, aphrodisiac 

Uses : Excellent for colds, coughs, fevers, and 
asthma; bleeding, emaciation, debility, dehydra¬ 
tion, vomiting, consumption, excellent Pitta reduc¬ 
ing herb, lungs. Nurtures heart, liver, and soothes 
the nervous system; relieves thirst, anxiety, im¬ 
proves the blood, skin disorders, threadworms in 
children, palpitation, coma, rejuvenative, strength¬ 
ening after chronic diseases, sedative, tissue defi¬ 
ciency. Leaves—eaten by pets. External poultice— 
dislodge worms from ulcers. Young shoots—ulcer 
worms (external—juice poured on bandage). Leaf 
bud—decoction for discharge of menses after 
delivery or when scanty. 

Preparation : Decoction, milk decoction, powder 
Precaution : Increases congestion if not balanced 
with pungent herbs like ginger 


Sanskrit : Yarahikand 



Hindi : Gendhi; Zamin-kand 
English : Yam 

Latin : Dioscorea bulbifera Linn., var.: sativa 
Part Used: Tubers 































Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 4: Herbology 



Habitat : Grows in UP, Bihar and Sub Himalayan 
region of India 

Energetics : Sweet, bitter-cold-sweet VP- (K+ in 
excess) 

Systems : Digestive, reproductive, nervous, urinary 
Action : Nutritive tonic, aphrodisiac, rejuvenative, 
diuretic, antispasmodic, analgesic 
Uses : Main male/female reproductive tonic. 
Impotency, infertility, increases semen, milk 
(progesterone), and other hormonal secretions (pi¬ 
tuitary, thyroid, estrogen); syphilis. Hemorrhoids, 
dysentery, diarrhea, senility, hormonal deficiency, 
colic, nervous excitability, hysteria, abdominal pain 
and cramps; promotes body weight, and soothes 
digestive organs. 

Precautions : Glucoside in the plant is poisonous; 
creates excess mucus and congestion. Only use 
with the advice of an Ayurvedic specialist 
Preparation : Decoction, milk decoction, powder, 
bolus, candy 


Sanskrit : Vasaka, Vasa 

3TRTm, ^RTT 

Hindi : Adosa 
English : Malabar Nut 

Latin : Adhatoda vasika Nees. (or Adenanthera 
vasika) 

Part Used : Leaves, roots, flowers, bark 


Habitat : A bush growing throughout India, espe¬ 
cially the lower Himalayan ranges 
Energetics : Bitter/astringent-cold-pungent PK- V+ 
Tissues : Plasma, blood 

Systems : Respiratory, circulatory, nervous, elimi¬ 
nation 

Action : Expectorant, diuretic, antispasmodic, al¬ 
terative 

Uses : The main respiratory herb: asthma 
(bronchodilator), bronchitis, bronchial asthma, 
cough, voice, thirst, TB; a main herb for bleeding 
disorders, bleeding gums; vomiting, dysentery, 
diarrhea, hepatitis, wasting, rheumatic and general 
pain, swelling, urinary disorders, diabetes; 
neuralgia, skin disorders, fever, epilepsy, hysteria, 
insanity; repellent for fleas, mosquitoes, 
centipedes, flies and other insects; Kapha disorders, 
flu. 

Preparation : Infusion, extract, decoction, poultice, 
powder, cigarette 


Sanskrit: Vatsnabh 


cJVfHR 



Hindi : Mldhavis 
English : Aconite, Monk’s Hood 
Latin: Aconitum felconeri Stapf. 
Part Used : Leaves, seeds, roots 
Habitat : Throughout India 


.tg ^ 
































The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Energetics : VP+ K 
Tissues : All, mainly blood/nerves 
Systems : All systems, especially the nervous sys¬ 
tem 

Action : Small doses—Anodyne, antidiabetic, an- 
tiperiodic, antiphlogistic, antipyretic, diaphoretic, 
diuretic. Large doses—poison, sedative, narcotic; 
metabolized quickly. It is related to and acting with 
Vydn Vayu. 

Uses : Enhances the properties of herbs, making 
them work faster (i.e., for emergencies and imme¬ 
diate relief). Leaves—indigestion, sedative; Exter¬ 
nally—neuralgia (especially facial), tetanus (acute 
and chronic), rheumatism (articular and muscular), 
gout, erysipelas, heart disorders. Internally—fe¬ 
vers, pain, increase urine flow. Root (external)— 
lepa for neuralgia, muscular rheumatism, itching 
with erythema, nasal catarrh, tonsillitis, sore throat, 
coryza, acute gout, leprosy, paralysis (alterative and 
nervine tonic), spermatorrhea, incontinence, and 
diabetes (decreases urine and sugar quantity). Root 
(internal)—fever, rheumatism, cough, asthma, 
snake bites, inflammations of mucus membranes 
of the throat, nose, stomach, and intestines. 
Preparation : Tincture, extract from fresh leaves and 
flower tops; external liniment, poultice, homeo¬ 
pathic formula 

Precaution : Poisonous without proper purification. 
The root is not used internally with heart disease. 
May cause severe headaches. Use only with the 
advice of a qualified practitioner. 


Sanskrit : Vidanga 

Hindi : Viranga 
English : None 

Latin : Embelia ribes Burm. (E. Indica, E. 
Glandulifera, E. Robusta, Roxb.) 

Habitat : Climbers in hilly parts of India ; Central 
and Lower Himalayas, to Sri Lanka and Singapore 
Part Used : Berries (fruit), leaves, root-bark 
Energetics : Pungent, astringent-hot-pungent PK- 
(V + mildly) 

Tissues : Plasma, blood 
Systems : Digestive, excretory 



Action: Alterative, anthelmintic, carminative, 
stimulant 


Uses : Main herb for worms (intestinal—espe¬ 
cially tape, ring) and fungus [Kutaj is best for 
amoebacidal parasites]; good for all abdominal 
disorders, constipation, gas, indigestion, hemor¬ 
rhoids. Root-bark powder—toothache. External 
paste—lung disease (pneumonia). Powdered berry 
paste— headache or as oil in nose for headache, 
obesity. 

Precautions : Can cause sexual debility 
Preparation : Decoction, powder, paste, confections, 
cigarettes 


Sanskrit : Vidari-kanda 

f^rarft 

Hindi : Bilai-kand 
English : None 

Latin : Ipomoea digitata Linn. (I. paniculata) 

Part Used : Tuberous root 
Habitat : The hotter regions of India 
Energetics : Bitter, sweet-cold-sweet VP- K+ 
Tissues : Fat, muscle, reproductive 
Systems : Digestive, reproductive 
Action : Tonic, alterative, aphrodisiac, demulcent, 
mucilaginous, diuretic, galactogogue, nutritive 
tonic, cholagogue, emmenagogue, rejuvenative 
Uses : Relative of the sweet potato, increases se¬ 
cretion of milk, emaciation, debility, poor diges¬ 
tion, increases weight, enlarged liver and spleen; 
moderates menstrual discharge, good for weak 





































Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 4: Herbology 



children. 

Preparation : Powder, confection, decoction, milk 
decoction 


Sanskrit : Yashtimadhu 



Hindi : Mithi-lakdi, Mulathi 

English : Licorice 

Latin : Glycyzrrhiza glabra Linn. 

Part Used : Root 

Habitat : Pound in many countries 

Energetics : Sweet, bitter-cold-sweet VP- K+ (only 

if used long term) 

Tissues : All 

Systems : Digestive, excretory, nervous, reproduc¬ 
tive, respiratory 


Action: Demulcent, emetic, expectorant, laxative, 
rejuvenative, sedative, tonic 
Uses : Excellent for acidity, voice, and heart tonic 
(with warm milk), Vayu dosha, bronchitis, colds, 
cough, laryngitis, general debility, emetic (in large 
doses), inflammation, mental calming, mucus liq¬ 
uefying and expectorating, mucus membrane toner 
and soother, muscle spasms, sore throat, ulcers 
(contains natural ulcer-healing steroid precursers), 
urination pain. Cleanses lungs and stomach of 
Kapha. Lor colds and flu, mix with ginger (1:1). 
Blood purification, abdominal pain, nourishes the 
brain—increasing cranial and cerebrospinal fluid. 
Improves complexion, hair, and vision. 

Spiritual Uses : Sattwic; gives contentment and 
harmony 

Precautions : Excess Kapha, edema, stops calcium 
and potassium absorption, not for osteoporosis, 
hypertension (increases water around heart). Pre¬ 
cautions are removed when taken in boiled milk 
or de-glycerized (DGL) form is used . Do not use 
when pregnant. 

Preparation : Decoction, milk decoction, powder, 
ghee 

Conclusion 

Herbs were chosen for this materia medica, based 
on those most commonly used, and those cover¬ 
ing most disorders. Thousands of herbs could be 
added to the list, but it was felt that a simple, man¬ 
ageable list of herbs was more practical. Other 
outstanding herbs worthy of mentioning are Kutaj, 
the best antiparasitical herb, and Garcinia (Tama¬ 
rind) an excellent weight loss herb for Kapha 
doshas (but can cause diarrhea in Pitta people if 
not blended with additional cold herbs). It is not 
recommended for Vayu doshas. Tamarind is an 
inexpensive food supplement found in Indian gro¬ 
ceries. It is also available in extract form in many 
new weight loss formulas, though it is more costly. 
The dose of Tamarind ( Garcinia ) extract is to be 
within the range of 100-500 mg. (9-45 grams) per 
use. 

Chandan (Sandalwood) is excellent for spiri¬ 
tual practices, is an antiseptic, antibacterial, a seda¬ 
tive, and cools all Pitta conditions. It was omitted 
from this list at a time when it was becoming over¬ 
harvested and was banned from export from In- 






















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


dia. That situation has been corrected, and thus 
will be added to this list in a future edition. 

Chandan ’s energetics are PV-; K/ama +in ex¬ 
cess. It is useful for broncitis, cystitis, dermati¬ 
tis, eye disorders, gonorrhea, herpes zoster, pal¬ 
pitations, sunstroke or when spening time in the 
sun (e.g., playing ball or working in the summer), 
urethritis, vaginitis. It relaxes and improves the 


functioning of the nervous, digestive, respiratory, 
and circulatory systems. It is not to be taken with 
excess Kapha conditions. 

Spiritually chandan calms the mind and body 
and awakens spiritual intelligence. It opens the 
third eye (djna chakra or eye of intuition and spiri¬ 
tual sight), cultures devotion ( bhakti ), and medita¬ 
tion ( sadhana ). 





















Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 5: Herb Glossary 


Limitted power comes from knowledge and action. 
Unlimitted everlasting power exists in being. 

Swami Ndrayan Tlrtha 


Chapter 5 
Herb Glossary 


he following is a list defining the effects 
of foods, drinks, and herbs. You may 
reference them as you read through the 
herbal materia medica. ‘S’ stands for Sanskrit, 
and ‘H’ stands for Hindi. 

Abortifacient : Induces abortion Herbs: chitrak, 
aloe, sandalwood 

Alterative : [S- Parivartakas or Rakta Shodhana 
Karma ; H- Badal-de-ne-wali] PK- V+; cold, bit¬ 
ter, astringent 

Uses: Cleanses and purifies the blood; heals sores, 
boils, tumors, cancers; reduces fevers and Pitta; 
detoxifies the liver, kills parasites and worms; helps 
in the treatment of infectious, contagious diseases 
and epidemics, flu, acne, herpes, venereal disease, 
lymphatics. Externally, used on wounds, sores ul¬ 
cers, etc. 

Cold Herbs: Aloe, neem, mahjishthd, sandalwood, 
red clover, and burdock 

Hot Herbs: Bayberry, black pepper, cinnamon, 
myrrh, and safflower 

Amoebicidal : For amoebic dysentery (e.g., kutaj) 

Analgesic : [S- Vedana shamana ; H- Pidha harne 
wall] 

Uses: Reduces or eliminates pain (e.g., digestive, 
circulatory, respiratory, nervous system, nerve, 
muscle, tooth pain, nervous digestion, headaches). 
Herbs: Camphor, chamomile, cinnamon, cloves, 
and echinacea 


Anesthetics : For surgical anesthesia 

Herbs: Ashok, calamus, guclmar, jatamanshl, 

katuka 

Anthelmintic : [S- Krumighana karma or 
Krimighna: H- Kire marne wali] 

Uses: Destroys and dispels worms, (round, tape, 
broad, and thread worms), parasites, fungus, yeast 
(e.g., Candida). See vermicide, vermifuge. Vdyu — 
in feces, Pitta in blood, Kapha in mucus. 

Cold Herbs: Pau d’arco, goldenseal, wormseed, 
wormwood 

Hot Herbs: Ajwan, cayenne, peppers, and pump¬ 
kin seeds 

Antibiotic : PK- V+ 

Uses: Bitter, antibacterial, and antiviral infections. 
Herbs: Turmeric and echinacea 

Antidiabetic : 

Herbs: Amalaki, blackberry, fenugreek, guduchl, 
guclmar, mica bhasma, senna, shildjit 

Antidiarrhea : An alterative, 

Cold Herbs: Blackberry, comfrey, gentian, red 

raspberry, and yellow dock 

Hot Herbs: Black pepper, ginger, harltakl, and 

buttcrmilk//fl.s,v/ 

Antiemetic : [S- Chherdinashana] 

Uses: Stops vomiting. 

Herbs: Cloves, coriander, ginger, neem, raspberry, 
and vainsha lochana 
















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Antiperiodic : [S- Visham Jvara har; H- Malarial 
Jvara ’s \ 

Uses: Prevents the periodic return of attacks of 
diseases or fevers (e.g., malaria, neuralgia). 
Herbs: Barberry, chirdyatd, guduchi, kutaj, and 
vachd 

Antipyretic: [S- Jwarahara; H- Bukhar Ko Dur 
Karne Wa roknewali\ 

Uses: Dispels heat or fever (see bitter, febrifuge) 
by reducing production of heat at its centers; de¬ 
stroying fever toxins; sweating to increase the loss 
of heat; drawing out the heat (e.g., cold baths). 
Herbs: Amalakl, black pepper, brihatl, dashmul, 
mahjishthd, nirgundl, safflower, sandalwood 

Anodyne : [S- Sula-orasa-mana; H- Sakornwali] 
Uses: Provides relief from ill-defined pains and 
general discomfort. Its effects works mostly on the 
sensory nerves. 

Herbs: Ashok, barberry, cedar, ginger, kushthd, 
licorice, vatsnab 

Antiphlogistics : 

Uses: An external application to reduce internal 
and external inflammations. 

Herbs: Aloe, barberry, white sandalwood, vatsnab 

Antirheumatic : VK- P+ 

Uses: Relieves or heals rheumatism 

Herbs: Hot diuretics: Juniper berries, guggul, 

ajwan, cinnamon, and parsley 

Antiseptic : [S- Shodhanlya: H- Sharir Saph Karne 
Wali] 

Uses: Removes infection or decay, which micro¬ 
organisms live (but does not destroy the organisms 
themselves)—see bitters. 

Herbs: Aloe, Chitrak, gokshura, gudmar, sandal¬ 
wood, shatdvari, shildjit, turmeric 

Antispasmodic : [S- Vikashi; H- Badan KiAinthan 
Wa Maror Ko Dur Wa Kam Karnewali] 

Uses: Relieves or prevents spasms of the volun¬ 
tary and involuntary muscles (also see nervines) 
by strengthening nerves and the nervous system; 
cramps, tremors, convulsions, prana, 
bronchodilators, menstrual cramps, nerve pain, 


headaches, open mind and senses, high Vayu, hy¬ 
persensitivity, nervousness, lumbago, sciatica, pa¬ 
ralysis, degenerative nerve disorders, Vayu emo¬ 
tions cause weak kidneys, insomnia, mental insta¬ 
bility, numbness, and ungroundedness. 

Herbs: Vayu and Kapha — Ashwagandha, basil 
(.tulsi ), calamus, guggul, licorice, myrrh, sage, and 
vdsdk 

Pitta— betony, brdhml (gotu kola), bhrihgardj, 
jatdmdnshl, peppermint, sandalwood, 
and spearmint. 

Antisvphilic : For relief of syphilis (usually alter¬ 
atives). 

Herbs: Black pepper, cedar, guduchi, guggul 

Aperient : [S- Bhedanlya: H- Dast Khol Kar lane 
wali] 

Uses: Mild purgatives or laxatives—see purgative. 
Herbs: Rhubarb 

Aphrodisiac : [S- Vajlkarana', H- Namardi-kidawa\ 
Uses: Gives great power or vitality by reinvigorat¬ 
ing the body and sexual organs, if directed spiritu¬ 
ally (upward), body, mind, and spiritual growth is 
gained; revitalizes all seven dhcitus. 

Two types exist: a) tonics, b) stimulants. 
Tonics: Develop tissue substance; Stimulants: in¬ 
crease the functioning of the reproductive organs. 
[Emmenagogues—more specific for women] 
Herbs: Angelica, ashwagandha, asparagus, 
fenugreek, fo-ti, ginseng, gokshura, hibiscus, 
kapikachhu seeds, pippall, rose, saffron, and 
shatdvari 

Some enhance spermatogenesis ( shukrala ) or 
Nutritive tonics —increase semen and breast milk: 
ashwagandha, bald, fo-ti, ghee, licorice, marsh¬ 
mallow, sesame seeds, shatdvari, and raw sugar 
Sattwic aphrodisiacs —(enhance ojas): 
ashwagandha, ghee, lotus seeds, and shatdvari 














Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 5: Herb Glossary 


Appetizer : For stimulating the appetite. 

Herbs: Cardamom, coriander 

Aromatic : [S- Suganclhi-taclravya ; H- Kushbuen] 
Uses: Provides fragrant, spicy tastes, and/or odors 
that stimulate the GI mucus membrane. 

Herbs: Cardamom, cinnamon, cloves, fennel, 
musta, nagkeshar, peppermint, and turmeric 

Astringent : [S- Sankeshaniya or Stambhana karma ; 
H- Bandhej-karnewali] PK- V+ cold 
Uses: Dries secretions (i.e., bleeding), excessive 
wastes, heals tissues externally, diarrhea, sweat, 
seminal emissions, urine, (see hemostatic, vulner¬ 
ary), antidiarrhea herbs). 

Herbs: Amalaki, arjuna, ashok, cinnamon, jasmine, 
sandalwood, and yarrow 

Bitters : PK- V++ 

Uses: Reduces toxins, toxins in blood and weight; 
destroys infection and ama\ high fever, 
heat, Pitta conditions, fever in blood, internal fe¬ 
ver, heated liver, much thirst, sweating, inflamma¬ 
tion, infection, bile regulator (hepatitis, jaundice), 
fat and sugar metabolism regulator (spleen-diabe¬ 
tes), antitumor (malignant and benign); use only 
until pathogens are destroyed. 

Herbs: aloe, barberry, chirayata, gentian, golden 
seal, katuka, and neem. Three types of bitters: 
Bitter aromatics have properties of both bitters 
(simple) and aromatics 

Bitter simple herbs stimulate only the GI tract 
Bitter styptic herbs add styptic and astringent prop¬ 
erties to those of bitterness 

Calmative : For soothing, sedating—see nervines. 

Cardiac Stimulant : For promoting circulation when 
there is a weak heart. 

Carminative : [S- Vata-anuloman or Dipanlya; H- 
Bao Haran] 

Uses: Dispels intestinal gas and distention; in¬ 
creases absorption of nutrients, dispels water, mu¬ 
cus, and cima in the GI tract; promotes normal peri¬ 
stalsis; increases agni\ cleanses srotas', relieves 
spasms and pain; promotes prana flow; improves 


weak digestion from anxiety, nervousness, or de¬ 
pression. May aggravate Vayu in long-term use. 
Herbs: 

Cold Herbs: Chamomile, chrysanthemum, corian¬ 
der, fennel, lime, musta, peppermint, and spear¬ 
mint 

Hot Herbs: Ajwan, basil, calamus, cardamom, cin¬ 
namon, ginger, and turmeric 
Formulations: Hingwastdk Churna, Lavan Bhaskar 
Churna, Trikatu, Triphald 

Cathartic : [S- Bhedana; H- Kara Julab] —see 
purgatives 

Laxatives —(figs, prunes, olive oil) 

Simple purgatives —(that stimulate the glands— 
senna, castor oil, aloe vera) 

Drastics —irritate the intestinal mucus membrane 
Hydrogogues —cause fluid motions—epsom salts 
Cholagogue —purgatives that stimulate the liver— 
rhubarb, aloe vera 

Cholagogue : [S- Mridubhedana', H- Halka Julab] 
Uses: For stimulating liver action, emptying the 
gall bladder, and promoting or increasing bile se¬ 
cretion or excretion; resulting in free purgation. 
Herbs: Arka, bhrihgardj, guduchl, licorice, saf¬ 
flower, senna, and sesame 

Cordial : For stimulating or exhilarating the heart— 
aromatic confections. 

Decongestant : For relieving congestion—see ex¬ 
pectorant. 

Demulcent : [S- Mridukara or Kasa-Svasahara: H- 
Tarkarnewali] 

Uses: For softening, soothing, and protecting mu¬ 
cus membranes and skin (i.e., protects stomach and 
urinary bladder lining). 

Herbs: barley, licorice; linseed, olive, and almond 
oils—see expectorant—moistening. 


















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Dentifrice : For cleaning teeth and gums 

Deobstruent : For removing obstructions to the 
functioning of the body. 

Diaphoretic : [S- Svedana Karma or Svedanlya\ H- 
Pasina Lanewali] 

Uses'. For promoting perspiration, circulation; dis¬ 
pels fever and chills; for eliminating surface tox¬ 
ins; relieving muscle tension, aching joints, and 
inflammatory skin conditions; bringing water down 
through urine; cold and drying in nature; relieving 
diarrhea, dysentery (dispels damp heat), kidneys, 
liver, urinary, and gall bladder disorders; dispel¬ 
ling stones of kidney and both bladders (lithotrip- 
tic); genitourinary disease (i.e., herpes), edema; 
painful, difficult, or burning urination or infections; 
first step in healing 
the disease. 

Herbs'. Two ki nds exist: hot and cold: 

Hot: Raise body temperature, dispel chills and 
colds; stimulants, expectorants, antiasthmatic, and 
antirheumatic. 

Hot herbs: Ajwan, basil, cardamom, cinnamon, 
eucalyptus, ginger, juniper berries, and parsley. 

P+++ 

Cold: Bitter-pungent, high fever, sore throat, tox¬ 
ins in blood, alterative, diuretic, cleanses lymph 
and plasma, subtle channels and capillaries, lungs, 
respiratory, open mind, prana, 
sinuses, stimulate nervous system, liver, moistens, 
soothes, and protects kidneys; fevers, infections, 
liver, gall bladder, steam bath, sauna (keep head 
out of box), hot bath, etc. Cold herbs: Asparagus, 
barley, burdock, chamomile, chrysanthemum, co¬ 
riander, dandelion, fennel, gokshura, marshmal¬ 
low, punarnava, spearmint 

Digestives : [S- Dipana-Pachana Karma] 

Uses: For assisting the stomach and intestines in 
normal digestion. 

Herbs: Coriander, cumin, rock salt, turmeric 

Disinfectant : [S - Aguntaka-roganashaka', H-Urkar 
Lagnewali] 

Uses: For destroying disease germs and noxious 
properties of fermentation; disinfectants, bacteri¬ 


cides, or germicides destroy pathogenic microbes 
(that cause communicable diseases); some antisep¬ 
tics are disinfectants; all disinfectants are antisep¬ 
tics. 

Herbs: Apdmarga, arka, guduchl, katukd, sandal¬ 
wood 

Diuretic : [S- Mutrala Karma or Mutra-virehana', 
H- Peshabjari Karnewali] PK- V+ 

Uses: For increasing urination; promoting kidney 
and urinary bladder activity; reducing and remov¬ 
ing toxins; reducing water in all tissues ( dhatus ). 
Three forms of diuretics: 

stimulating: stimulates kidneys during their elimi¬ 
nation (e.g., pepper, juniper) 
hydragogue: raises blood pressure in the glomeruli 
(e.g., digitalis, caffeine) 

refrigerant: washes out the kidneys (e.g., drinking 
lots of water) 

Herbs: Apdmarga, ashwagandha, barberry, carda¬ 
mom, cinnamon, ginger, gotu kola, gokshura, 
guduchl, licorice, musta, punarnava, sandalwood, 
shatdvarl, shildjit, vachd 

Emetic : [S- Vamakarlya; H- Qai Lanewali] 

Uses: Including or causing vomiting by local ac¬ 
tion on the nerves of the stomach and mucus mem¬ 
brane. 

Three types of emetics: 

central: Acts through the vomiting center of the 
brain (e.g., chamomile) 

local: Focally irritates the nerves of the gastric 
mucus membrane (e.g., mustard, salt water) 
general: Acts through the blood on the vomiting 
center (these are partly local emetics) 

Herbs: Apdmarga, arka, chakramarda, chitrak, 
licorice, pippall, rock salt, vachd 

Emmenagogue : [S- Rajastha-panlya or 
Raktabhisarana ] 

Pungent and bitter 

Uses: For promoting and regulating menstruation 
(including PMS, uterine tumors, or infections). 
Clears blood congestion, blood clot; builds the 
blood; moistens female reproductive organs; coun¬ 
teracts aging and poor nutrition; 














Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 5: Herb Glossary 


Herbs: Aloe, angelica, hibiscus, jasmine, licorice, 
myrrh, peony, rose, saffron, shatdvari 
Cold Herbs: Menstrual or uterine infections, bleed¬ 
ing; anger, and irritability: Blessed thistle, chamo¬ 
mile, chrysanthemum, hibiscus, manjishthd, red 
raspberry, and rose 

Heating Herbs: Delayed menses (from overexpo¬ 
sure to cold), overexertion, nervous anxiety: An¬ 
gelica, cinnamon, ginger, myrrh, safflower; used 
for antispasmodics, uterine cramps; diuretic for 
PMS, water retention; hemostatics tonic, 
rejuvenative. 

Emollient : [S- Snehopaga: H- JalanAur Sozish Ko 
Dur Karnewali] Oils or fats—see demulcent 
Uses: Externally—protect, soften, and relax the 
skin (e.g., oils, honey, bread or bran poultice, car¬ 
rots, turnips, ointments, hot fomentations). 

Epispastic : [S- Dosha-ghnalepa; H- Uparnewali] 
Substances locally applied to the skin—see rube¬ 
facient 

Uses: Produces blisters and redness on the surface 
(e.g., mustard). 

Errhine : [S- Shiro-virechana ; H- Chink Lanewali 
Ya Nazla Bahadenewali] herbs applied to the mu¬ 
cus membranes of the nose \ 

Uses: Increases nasal secretion with or without 
causing sneezing. 

Herbs: Amalaki, apdmdrga, arka, black pepper, 
ginger, gudmar, jasmine, pippali, vachd, vidahga 

Exhilarant : Herbs that enliven and cheer the mind. 

Expectorant : [S- Kasa-Svasahara\ H- Khansi Aur 
dame Ko Dur Darnewali\ 

Uses: Promotes phlegm and mucus discharge; 
clears lungs, nasal passages, and stomach; respi¬ 
ratory (colds, flu, asthma, bronchitis, pneumonia), 
digestive problems (from mucus in GI tract) caus¬ 
ing poor absorption of nutrients; removes phlegm 
and mucus that can accumulate and cause growths 
or tumors (usually benign) or nervous or circula¬ 
tory ones. 

Herbs: Two types: Drying (e.g., ginger) [hot/stimu¬ 
lant/diaphoretic/carminative] and 


moistening (e.g., licorice) which liquefy—cold and 
sweet herbs. These are also demulcent and emol¬ 
lients—see demulcent—dispel heat and dryness; 
liquefy Kapha and dma for Vayu and Vayu/Pitta 
respiratory illness; lung tonics, nerves, and heart 
Dry herbs: Calamus, cardamom, cinnamon, cloves, 
elecampane, dry ginger, pippali, and sage 
Moist herbs: Bamboo, comfrey root, licorice, 
marshmallow, milk, raw sugar, slippery elm, cough 
relieving: bayberry, ephedra, eucalyptus, thyme, 
wild cherry. There are seven ways that they work: 

1) Relieving bronchial tube spasms (lobelia, to¬ 
bacco) 

2) Through dislodging, by vomiting (see emetics— 
large doses) 

3) Increasing the flow from the inflamed membrane 
(see emetics—small doses) 

4) Promoting expectoration (onion, asafoetidal see 
expectorant) 

5) By soothing the irritation in the respiratory cen¬ 
ter and promoting expectoration 

6) Causing expectoration through stimulating the 
nerves of the mouth 

7) By stimulating the respiratory center and 
strengthening the expulsive mechanistic muscles 

Febrifuge : [S- Jvarahar; H- Bukhar Ko Dur Karne- 
wa- roknewali ] reduces fever; (see antipyretic, an- 
tiperiodic, antiseptic) 

Galactogogue : (S- Stanya-janana; H- Dudh 
Barhanewali] increases breast milk secretion (in¬ 
ternally or externally applied) 

Herbs: Cumin, fennel, musta, pippali, shatdvari, 
white musali 

Germicide : Destroys germs and worms [see disin¬ 
fectant] 

Germifuge : An agent that expels germs [see ger¬ 
micide] 

Hemostatic : [S- Shonitasthapana\ H- Khun Band 
Karnewali ] astringent, alterative PK- V+ 

Uses: Stops bleeding, purifies blood (styptics). 

















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Herbs: Cold herbs: Durba, goldenseal, mahjishthd, 
red raspberry, turmeric 

Hot herbs: Cinnamon, ginger; used with nutritives 
and tonics 

Irritant: Causes irritation or inflammation 
Herbs: Arka, cinnamon, cardamom, ginger, myrrh 

Laxative : (S- Svalpabhedana or Virechanlya\ H- 
DastKhol Karlanewali ] mild purgative that relaxes 
the bowels 

Herbs: castor oil, flax seed, psyllium, rhubarb, 
senna; and triphald (in large doses). 

Lithotriptic : Dissolves and prevents kidney, urinary 
and gall bladder stones (see diuretic;), nervine: 
nutritive, builds tissues 

Herbs: Arjuna, mialakl, arka, gokshura, paslmna 
bheda, punarnavd 

Myotic : [S- Netra-kashitraroga\ H- Ankhon Ki 
Putli Ko Sakornewali ] agents that cause the con¬ 
traction of the pupil and diminution of ocular ten¬ 
sion 

Nervine : [H- Rag-aur-re short Men Bal Karnewali] 
herbs that calm excited nerves and heal nervous 
diseases and the nervous system 
Herbs: Ashwagandha, bald, gudmar, shafikh 
pushpl 

Parasiticide : [S- Krimighna\ H- Bahar Ke Kire 
marnewali] destroys parasites (see germicide, an- 
tiparasitic) 

Parturifacient : Herbs inducing childbirth 
Herbs: Barley, pippall, punarnavd root (wrapped 
around belly) 

Purgative : [S- Virechanlya; H- Kara Julab] pro¬ 
duce, hasten or increase intestinal evacuation from 
the bowels 

Herbs: Aloe, apdpdmarga, bald, bhrihgardj, bilwa, 
chitrak, epsom salts, Ishabgol, kantakdrl, katukd, 
licorice, punarnavd, rhubarb, safflower, senna 


Refrigerant : [S- Dahanashaka\ H- Pias 
Bujhanewali\ 

Uses: Cools and reduces fevers; quenches thirst 
and suppresses unnatural body heat. 

Herbs: Aloe, chitrak, coriander, ginger, hibiscus, 
orange, lemon, licorice, musta, pippall, sandal¬ 
wood, shatdvarl, cane sugar, vachd, vidahga 

Resolvent : Causes the absorption of inflammations 
and other swellings by stimulating the lymphatics 

Restorative : Herbs, cordials or foods that restore 
nutritive deficiencies 

Rubefacient : [S- Barlyalepana; H- Lai Chakatte 
Kar Denewali] 

Uses: An external remedy that irritates the nerve 
ends in the skin, causing distention of the capillar¬ 
ies, inflammation and reddening of the skin; in¬ 
creasing blood flow to that area. 

Herbs: Bdkuchl seeds, black pepper, cayenne, 
chitrak, ginger, licorice, mahjishthd, mustard, 
pippall 

Sialagogue : [S- Lalavardhaka\ H- Ral-barhanewa!i 
Wa Thuk Barhanewali\ 

Uses: Increases or produces saliva, either by local 
mouth irritation; causing reflex activity of the 
glands; (e.g., mustard, tobacco), or by exciting the 
glands during their elimination. 

Herbs: Arka, black pepper, chitrak, chirdyatd, gin¬ 
ger, licorice, pippall 

Stimulant : [S- Agni-sthapanlya or Dipana; H - 
Uksanewali] 

VK- P+. Antibacterial, antiparasitical (also see 
carminative) 

Uses & Herbs: Increases agni, destroys dma, in¬ 
creases autoimmune system, drying (e.g., pepper, 
cloves, cinnamon, dry ginger, and ajwan). 
Numerous forms of stimulants exist: 
arterial: Cayenne 

cardiac: Camphor, cane sugar, ephedra, glucose 
cerebrospinal: Jatdmdnshl, kushthd 
circulatory: Adrenaline 
eyes: Barberry extract, yellow thistle juice 




















Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 5: Herb Glossary 


general: a) Diffusible (e.g., antispasmodics), b) 
Permanent (i.e., tonics, astringents) 
local: Laxatives, emetics, purgatives, diuretics, 
diaphoretics, rubefacients, expectorants, 
sialagogues, epispastics 

nervine (i.e., exciting the nervous system): Musk, 
asafoetida, caffeine 

respiratory: Bhumidmalaki, cardamom, 

jatdmdnshi, manjishtha, nirgundi, tulsi 

rheumatism etc: See rubefacient 

skin: Cedar, chakra marda, sandalwood 

spinal: Barley, dates, figs, pomegranate, rice, cane 

sugar 

ulcers/abscesses: Gotu kola, nirgundi 

uterine: Cinnamon, guggul, myrrh, vamsha 

lochana 

vascular: Cayenne, cinnamon, ginger, kantakdri, 

nutmeg , pippali, vacha 

stomachic: See aromatics and see below 

Stomachic : [S- Kshudha-vardhaniya\ H- Bhuk 
Barhanewali] digestive stimulant (see stimulant, 
bitters, carminative) 

Uses: Increases or excites gastric juice secretion; 
improves stomach tone, promotes appetite, and 
digestion. 

Herbs: Amalaki, bald, bhrihgardj, bilwa, black 
pepper, cardamom, cedar, chirdyatd, chitrak, 
cumin, ginger, haritaki, katukd, licorice, musta, 
pippali, turmeric, vacha, vidahga 

Styptic : [S- Raktha-sthambana; H- Khun Band 
Karanewali\ (See hemostatic) 

Uses: Causes vascular contraction of the blood 
vessels or coagulation of the albuminous tissues 
of the blood; checks hemorrhage 
Herbs: Adrenaline, alum 

Tonic (aromatic & bitter) : [H- Taqat Denewali] 
coldest: PK- V++ (in most cases) 

Uses: Pitta conditions (i.e., fever, heat); blood 
detox, weight loss, fever in blood; destroys dma, 
liver, and bile regulation (i.e., hepatitis, jaundice); 
fat and sugar reduction (i.e., spleen-diabetes); an¬ 


titumor (benign and malignant), removes conges¬ 
tion. 

Herbs: Aloe, bald, barberry, chirdyatd, guduchi, 
katukd, gentian, goldenseal, katukd, musta, neem, 
vacha. Various forms of tonics exist: 
stomachic [H- Khub Bhuk Laganewali] 
cardiac [H- Dilko Taqat Denewali 
blood [H- Khun Barhanewali] 

Tonic (astringent) : tissue builders; see nutritives 
Herbs: Haritaki 

Tonic (nutritive): [S- Bruhangana karma', U-Dhalu 
barane wale] VP- K+ 

Uses: Permanently increases the tone of a part of 
the body, or the entire system by nourishing and 
increasing weight. They are sweet, heavy, oily, or 
mucilaginous; increasing vital fluids, muscles, and 
fat; builds the blood and lymph; increases milk and 
semen; restoratives for weakness, emaciation, de¬ 
bility, and convalescence; soothing, harmonizing, 
dispels rigidity, and calms nerves. They are taken 
with stimulant or carminative herbs (e.g., ginger 
or cardamom) to assist in absorption; having ex¬ 
pectorant, demulcent, and emollient properties; 
nurtures the lungs and stomach. 

Herbs: Amalaki, arka, ashwagandha, bald, 
bhrihgardj, bibhitaki, cane sugar, coconut, cori¬ 
ander, dates, ghee, gokshura, guduchi, guggul, 
haritaki, honey, jatdmdnshi, licorice, manjishtha, 
milk, raisins, sesame seeds, shatdvari, turmeric, 
vamsha lochana, vidahga, vidari kand 

Rejuvenative Tonics : [S- Rasdyana karma] 

Uses: Regenerates cells and tissues (body and 
brain); promotes longevity—spiritual and physi¬ 
cal. For young and old people. 

Herbs: 

Vdyu — Ashwagandha, guggul, haritaki, calamus, 
and shatdvari. 

Pitta —Aloe, amalaki, gotu kola, shatdvari, saf¬ 
fron, and gokshura. 

Kapha — Bibhitaki, guggul, pippali, shildjit, 
triphald, and elecampane. 











The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Vermicide: [H- Kiremarnewali ] that which kills 
intestinal worms (see anthelmintic) 

Vermifuge: [Kiremarnewali ] Expels intestinal 
worms (but may not kill the worms). See an¬ 
thelmintic 

Vulneraries: Astringent, demulcent, emollient 


PK- V+ 

Use s: Heals tissue via external use; cool as a 
plaster or poultice for cuts, wounds, bums, hem¬ 
orrhage. 

Herbs,'. Aloe, comfrey, honey, licorice, marsh¬ 
mallow, turmeric, and slippery elm. 



J MjdxrLcmljcjCLL § 7 It-IlLIlA- 







Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 6: Nutrition 


The doctor of the future will give no medicine but will interest their patients 
in the care of the human frame, in diet, and in the cause and prevention of disease. 

Thomas Edison 


Chapter 6 
Nutrition 



e have briefly touched upon the topic of 
I tastes, as they are related to the seasons. 
This may be quite an unusual way to look at the 
seasons, but nonetheless, a useful one when con¬ 
sidering health. To better understand the idea of 
taste from the Ayurvedic viewpoint, we need to 
examine it in depth. Its insights explain the role of 
tastes in healing. Unique to Ayurveda is a scien¬ 
tific breakdown of tastes, discussed according to 
energies—or energetics. Ayurveda classifies herbs, 
foods, and drinks into five aspects. Each has its 
own therapeutic effects; 

1. Taste 

2. Element (property) 

3. Hot or cold effect 

4. Post-digestion effect (final taste after digestion) 

5. Special properties 

Taste : It is considered therapeutic for several rea¬ 
sons. The Sanskrit word for taste is “Rasa”. It 
means delight or essence, both of which promote 
healing. A channel extends from the mouth into 
the head and brings the essence (one meaning of 
taste) to the brain. This essence stimulates prana, 
which in turn stimulates the agni or digestive fires. 
If the taste of the food is not pleasing, the gastric 
fires may not digest the food and thus do not pro¬ 
vide proper nutrition. That is why Ayurvedic cook¬ 
ing is a science unto itself, blending the right 
amount of herbs for the right taste. In our society, 
we have adulterated our sense of taste with un¬ 
wholesome (artificial) foods (one of the two fun¬ 
damental causes of disease we discussed in vol¬ 
ume one). 


Element: Six tastes originate from the five ele¬ 
ments, transmitting their properties: sweet, salty, 
sour, pungent, bitter, astringent. All tastes essen¬ 
tially originate in the water element, having their 
origin here. No food consists only of one taste; all 
five elements are contained in all substances. So 
when it is said that a food has a certain taste (e.g., 
sweet), that taste predominates. Similarly, no ill¬ 
ness is caused by purely one dosha. However, when 
a dosha predominates, it is said that an illness is 
caused by that specific dosha. 


Taste 

Element 

Food 

sweet 

earth/water 

sugar, starches 

sour 

earth/fire 

fermented, acids 

salty 

water/fire 

salt, alkaline 

pungent 

fire/air 

spicy, acrid, 
aromatic 

bitter 

ether/air 

herbs 

astringent 

earth/air* 

constricting 
quality with 
tannin 


All persons need some for each of the six tastes 
in their diet. However, depending on one’s consti¬ 
tution and the season, one will adjust their tastes 
to balance their dosha. The key is to have a mod¬ 
erate amount of each taste. The benefits listed be¬ 
low result from ingesting foods that develop these 
healing measures. However, they relate primarily 
to the dosha( s) listed. If used by a dosha not listed, 
they will create excess. 















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Taste 

(Rasa) 

Physical Effect 

Mental Effect 

sweet 

VP- 

builds & strengthens tissues, life sap (ojas), 
bones complexion 

contentment, 

pleasure 

sour VK- 

digestiveaid, dispels gas, nourishes, relieves 
thirst, satiates, helps circulation and 
elimination, strengthens heart, aids all tissues 
but reproductive, maintains acidity 

wakens mind & 

senses 

salty V- 

softening, lubricates tissues, laxative, sedative, 
digestive aid, promotes sweating, purgative, 
emetic, softens hard tumors, decongests hard 
phlegm, maintains mineral balance, 
holdswater, improves taste 

calms nerves, 
stops anxiety 

pungent 

VK- 

heals throat diseases and VK allergic rashes, 
skin diseases, counters water, grease, and fat; 
digestive aid, dispels gas, removes edema, 
improves taste, promotes sweat, improves 
metabolism and organic functions, breaks up 
stagnant blood or clots and other hard masses, 
clears channels, relieves nerve pain and 
muscle tension 

opens mind 
and senses 

bitter 

PK- 

heals anorexia, thirst, skin diseases, fever, 
nausea, burnng, parasites, and bacteria; blood 
purifier, cleanses, detoxifies, reduces fat, 
tissue, and water excesses; antibiotic, 
antiseptic, digestive aid, cleanses breast milk, 
digests sugar and fat 

clears senses and 
emotions 

astringent 

PK- 

stops bleeding and cleanses blood, sweat, 
diarrhea, heals skin and mucus membranes, 
prolapse, and ulcers; expectorant, diuretic, 
tightens tissues, dries moisture and fat 

cools fiery 
minds and clears 
senses and 
emotions 
removes lethargy 


(V = Vayu, P = Pitta, K = Kapha, ‘-’means reduces) 


Negative Effects Due to Excess 

The diseases listed below resulted from ingesting foods that create excesses in the dosha. 
In excess, eventually any dosha will develop these ailments. 














Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 6: Nutrition 


Taste 

(Rasa) 

Physical Effect 

Mental Effect 

sweet K+ 

excess fat diseases; 
obesity, diabetes 
indigestion, 
malignant tumors, 
neck gland 
enlargement 

Kapha: 
lethargy, 
Vayu: anxiety 

sour P+ 

flabbiness, loss of 
strength, fever, thirst, 
blindness, itching, 
pallor, Pitta anemia, 
herpes, small pox 

giddiness, 

anger, 

impatience, hot 
temper 

salty PK+ 

hypertension, 
baldness, gray hair, 
skin diseases, 
wrinkles, thirst, 
herpes, loss of 
strength, abscesses 

anger, 

impatience, 

lethargy 

pungent 

P+ 

thirst, depletion of 
reproductive fluid 
and strength, 
fainting, tremors, 
waist/back pain 

anger, 

impatience 

bitter V+ 

tissue depletion,Vayu 
diseases 

anxiety, fear, 
insomnia 

astringent 

V+ 

undigested foods, 
heart pain, thirst, 
emaciation, 
virilityloss, 
constipation, blocked 
channels 

anxiety, worry, 
fear, insomnia 


It is interesting that Ayurveda is not concerned 
with naming diseases. Illness is determined accord¬ 
ing to the excesses and deficiencies of the elements 
or doshas (air, fire, and water). When doshas are 
balanced, illness does not exist. From this point of 
view, one can see how, by understanding which 
tastes mitigate or aggravate which doshas, nutri¬ 
tion becomes an elemental and effective measure 
in maintaining the balance of health. Various dis¬ 
eases are seen to be directly related to tastes and 


doshas in the charts shown above. Thus, by fol¬ 
lowing an appropriate food plan for one’s consti¬ 
tution, a person may maintain health and prevent 
future illness. 


Energy (Vlrya): This energy activates tastes. 
Foods and drinks possess either cold or hot energy 
(in the body). Each taste has an associated energy. 


Taste 

Energy 

Foods 

sweet 

cold 

sugar 

sour 

acidic */hot 

yogurt, wine, 
pickles 

salty 

hot 

table salt, 
seaweed 

pungent 

hot 

hot peppers, 
chillies, wine 

bitter 

cold 

alum, golden 
seal, neem 

astringent 

constricting 

alum, oak 
bark 


* Yogurt is sour, sweet, and heavy. Pure forms 
of the tastes will aggravate one’s dosha more 
easily than complex versions and thus should 
be used with care. 


Aggravating 

Pacifying 

sugar 

complex carbohydrates 

table salt 

seaweed 

hot peppers 
(e.g., cayenne) 

mild spices 
(e.g., cardamom) 

alcohol 

yogurt, sour fruit 

pure bitters 
(e.g., goldenseal) 

mild bitters (aloe gel) 

pure astringents 
(strong tannins) 

mild astringents 
(e.g., red raspberry) 

































The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Post-Digestive (Vipaka): 

Tastes may change at the end of the digestive 
process. This is due to the digestive agni (fire) 
juices in the alimentary tract (metabolism). For 
example, foods or liquids, initially sweet, develop 
an aftertaste. This taste may be any of the six tastes. 
These aftertastes also affect a person’s constitu¬ 
tion. 


6 Tastes 

Post-Digestive 

Taste 

sweet, salty 

becomes sweet 

sour 

remains sour 

pungent, bitter, 
astringent 

becomes pungent 


[Throughout this text, the following abbrevia¬ 
tions are used: ‘V’ ‘P’ ‘K’ stand for Vayu, Pitta, 
Kapha; respectively. stands for reducing a dosha, 
and ‘+’ means increasing a dosha] 

Sweet VP- K+ (moist) promotes secretion of 
Kapha, semen, easy and comfortable gas release, 
and helps the discharge of urine and feces. Pro¬ 
duces saliva. 

Sour P+ increases the tissues (except the repro¬ 
ductive dhatu , which is reduced). It produces bile, 
acid. 

Salty P+ produces saliva 

Pungent P+ (in time) causes gas, constipation, pain¬ 
ful urine, reduces semen with difficult discharge. 
Bitter PK- V+ produces dryness and gas in the 
colon 

Astringent PK- V+ constricts, bothers Vayu. 


Emotions and Taste 

Each of the six tastes produces or enhances a 
certain emotion when eaten. Thus, emotional dis¬ 
orders may be balanced by eating and avoiding 
foods, according to the tastes. 


Taste 

Emotions 

Excesses 

sweet 

desire 

Kapha 

sour 

envy 

Pitta 

salty 

greed 

Kapha/Pitta 

pungent 

anger 

Pitta 

bitter 

grief 

Vayu 

astringent 

fear 

Vayu 


Doshas, Nutrition, and the 6 Tastes 

Vayu is balanced by supplementing with moist 
tastes, sweet, sour, and salty (balancing dryness), 
and some warm tastes as well. Pitta is balanced by 
using sweet (moist), bitter, and astringent (cool¬ 
ing) tastes. This helps counter heat-related illness 
(e.g., infection, rash, anger, impatience). Kapha 
diseases are removed by using sour and pungent 
tastes (i.e., they heat and burn up water). Bitter 
tastes also reduce Kapha by causing a drying ac¬ 
tion. 

Sweet: Generally, food is sweet in taste, neu¬ 
tral in energy, and sweet in its post-digestive ef¬ 
fect. It decreases Vayu and Pitta, and increases 
Kapha. It nourishes and maintains humors, dhatus, 
and malas (wastes). 

Sour: Examples of sour tastes include sour fruit, 
tomatoes, and pickled vegetables. All issues are 
nourished by sour tastes, except reproductive tis¬ 
sue (of the sour tastes, only yogurt nourishes all 
tissues). 

Salty: Seafood or condiment. In moderation, 
salt strengthens all tissues. When used in excess, 
it depletes tissues. 

Pungent: Spices and spicy vegetables do not 
offer much nutrition, but they stimulate digestion. 

Bitter: Vegetables offer little nutrition. They are 
useful in clearing and cleansing digestive organs, 
and in aiding digestion, especially if taken before 
meals (for Pitta and Kapha doshas ). 

Astringent: This is mainly a secondary taste. 
Astringent foods, like green vegetables or unripe 



















Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 6: Nutrition 


apples, provide minerals but do not build tissues. 

Energy: Most foods are neutral in heating and 
cooling effects. To apply hot or cold therapeutics, 
appropriate spices and foods are eaten cooked or 
raw. 

Heavy/Light: Most foods tend to be heavy, 
though many light foods also exist. Spices can 
make foods lighter. Oils can make them heavier. 
Foods are also dry or moist. Dryness can be in¬ 
creased by eating dry foods or toast, or made more 
moist by frying foods or adding liquids. 

Special Properties: (Prabhava) 

Herbs also have some subtler, more specific 
qualities, beyond their traditional rules and defini¬ 
tions. For example, basil, although a heating herb, 
reduces fever. Herbs with similar energies will have 
different special properties. 

Certain external actions affect the herb’s 
prabhava : mantras, gems, yantras, or just the in¬ 
tention or love imparted by the practitioner alters 
the herbs beyond the general classifications. For 
example, amalaki (embellica officinalis ) and 
barhal (a variety of ficus bengalensis, linn.) both 
have same taste, property, energy, and final taste 
after digestion. Yet amalaki alleviates the doshas 
and barhal aggravates the doshas. Also til (sesame 
seeds) and madan (randia dumetorum, lamk.) have 
predominant sweet, astringent, and bitter tastes. 
Both are oily and sticky. Yet, madan is an emetic, 
sesame is not. Similarly, wearing specific stones 
like topaz, ruby, sapphire etc., can heal different 
diseases. 


Dual Doshas 

It is simple mathematics. When doshas are not 
in a balanced state, either you must increase the 
depleted dosha or decrease the aggravated dosha. 
When a person has a dual dosha (e.g., Vayu/Pitta) 
they are advised to ingest foods and herbs that in¬ 
crease the third or deficient element (e.g., Kapha). 
Simultaneously, one reduces their intake of foods 
and herbs that increase the two excessive doshas 
(e.g., Vayu and Pitta). 


Foods affect the surface nutrition, while herbs 
aid the subtle nutrition. There also may be instances 
when one dosha is greatly in excess, and a second 
mildly aggravated. Thus, proper consideration of 
degree of derangement is necessary as well. 

Tastes and Organs 

Each of the six tastes also produces effects on 
each of the internal organs as well. Again, through 
ingesting the proper tastes, the health of the or¬ 
gans may be maintained. 

Physiology of the 6 Tastes 

Ayurveda says that each taste, when found in 
excess, will adversely affect certain organs in the 
body. This is used as a cross-reference to the five- 
element view of health and balance, stated earlier. 


Taste 

Organ 

Sweet 

spleen (pancreas) 

Sour 

liver 

Salty 

kidneys 

Pungent 

lungs 

Bitter 

heart 

Astringent 

colon 


Thus, Ayurveda offers a unique view of the 
energetics of taste: six tastes (the initial taste, its 
hot or cold energy, and its aftertaste), how tastes 
are related to the doshas, organs, diseases, and 
emotions, and their special properties. It is a com¬ 
plete science of the mechanics and energies. Fur¬ 
ther, it reveals a causal relationship between food 
and health; how one feels is greatly decided by 
what one eats. 


fn \ 













The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


As discussed earlier, Ayurveda aims to remove 
the cause of an illness. Rather than ‘curing’ a spe¬ 
cific disease, this science addresses the balance of 
the whole individual. Along with external causes 
it always considers the two levels of health: body 
and mind. In the last chapter, we discussed how 
the tastes and energies of foods play a direct role 
in creating health or illness, from the Ayurvedic 
point of view. 

Life habits (external) measures are also con¬ 
sidered another essential Ayurvedic healing mea¬ 
sure, when lifestyle changes are gradually adapted. 
In the original Ayurvedic texts, people are cau¬ 
tioned not to start or stop habits too suddenly. In 
the chapter on the seasons, there was a subtle 7- 
day transition period between seasons to be noted 
and worked with to avoid disease during the shift. 
We find similar wisdom in the spiritual texts about 
the transition points at sunrise, noon, sunset, and 
midnight. It is suggested that these are points of 
weakness; the person is better advised to spend 
these transitional times in sadhana (meditation). 

Even for a healing science that suggests veg¬ 
etarianism to those who are healthy, Ayurveda does 
not advise giving up meat cold-turkey (no pun in¬ 
tended). Even if a food is bad for one’s constitu¬ 
tion (e.g., one’s favorite vegetables or desserts), or 
good for their dosha, gradual stopping and start¬ 
ing of any habits is advised. Gentleness is the key. 
Similarly, if one undertakes too radically a detoxi¬ 
fication program, one may experience bodily dis¬ 
comforts from conditions such as diarrhea or ex¬ 
cess toxins. Ayurveda has the unique position of 
offering a healing process that does not have to 
make one feel bad before feeling better. Healing is 
approached in that sense. It will make life better, 
simpler, and more natural, enhancing spiritual 
growth as well. It may take some months before 
the effects of healing are manifested. Making one 
or two changes for health, and consistently follow¬ 
ing them, is better than experimenting here and 
there without a foundation for growth and heal¬ 
ing. The Ayurvedic motto is, ‘no pain—no pain’. 

Also, people often look for quick, healing, 
magic-medicine that allows them to return to their 
self-harming (bad habits) ways. In fact, illness is a 
sign that life is not being lived in balance. Herbs 


are a food supplement and not magic pills that in¬ 
stantly remove discomfort. Some people may be 
impatient with this ‘gradual’ lifestyle development, 
but it is an enhancement of lifestyle and not a quick 
cure that Ayurveda achieves. 

Chronic indigestion also requires slow change. 
One week of kicharl (rice and beans may be needed 
for those with severe conditions. Again, some 
people may be disinclined about making changes, 
but the alternatives are not pleasant. Eventually one 
finds a comfortable food plan. 

As discussed earlier, food essence rises through 
the channel to the brain, so it is crucial that whole¬ 
some foods are taken for their sattwic essence. 
Organic is also very good. Sattwic essence brings 
the energy of sattwa directly into the mind. This is 
discussed, in detail, in another chapter as the final 
step before experiencing samcidhi Saibikalpa) . 

Dietary Questions 

Eat to 1/3 capacity of stomach, 
drink 1/3 and leave 1/3 for God. 

Ashtanga Hridayam 

The Ayurvedic determination of eating habits fol¬ 
lows. 


Overview 

Preparation Eating warm (cooked) foods enliv¬ 
ens the enzymes for easily and quickly digesting 
food, promoting Apana Vayu, and removing 
Kapha. However, when food is overcooked, its life 
force becomes depleted. Further, cooking with too 
much heavy oil can weaken the digestive fire. Food 
is best eaten when cooked or steamed rather than 
uncooked; it is more nutritive and building. Also, 
persons on spiritual paths, (i.e., practicing sadhana 
(meditation) and following a guru or spiritual 
guide), generally need not follow such drastic raw- 
food measures. Eating raw food causes roughness 
among persons on the spiritual path. It is true that 
raw foods have enzymes to remove toxins, but they 
do not adequately build the tissues. Fruit is better 





Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 6: Nutrition 


fresh and uncooked. Microwaves damage the life- 
force. Restaurant food is generally over- or under¬ 
spiced, and not as good as a home-cooked meal. 
Cooking over a wood fire is best. Cooking on a 
gas stove is better than cooking on an electric stove. 

Quality Sattwic: organic, fresh, homegrown, fresh- 
picked, and raw dairy foods are advised. It is not 
advisable to eat foods that are rotten, under or over 
cooked, burnt, unripe, overripe, stale, or junk food. 
Other harmful foods include those that are canned, 
artificial, rancid, and prepared with additives, pre¬ 
servatives, or artificial colors. Finally, frozen foods 
that contain steroids and chemicals (milk and ani¬ 
mal products usually have steroids, chemicals, and 
preservatives in them) should not be eaten. 

Quantity A proper quantity of food is easily di¬ 
gested, promotes longevity without afflicting the 
doshas , and helps Apdna Vayu. Food, when eaten, 
should fill one-third of the stomach size or capac¬ 
ity. Liquid, when taken after meals, also should 
fill one-third the stomach size. The time to drink 
liquids at mealtime varies with the individual. 
Heavy or obese persons should drink before meals. 
Underweight or thin persons should drink liquids 
after meals, and persons of normal weight should 
drink with their meals. The remaining one-third of 
space in the stomach helps digestion. The key is 
moderation and regularity. Vayu doshas need to 
eat every 3-4 hours. Pitta persons generally have 
good digestive fire. Kapha constitutions need to 
eat less. Ultimately, the stronger the digestive fire, 
the more one can eat. (Less food is better with a 
fever. 


When Hungry Eat only after the previous meal 
has been digested. Otherwise, the digestive prod¬ 
uct of the previous meal becomes mixed with the 
new food, instantly aggravating all the doshas. The 
digestive fire/enzymes have to act upon the food 
for some time in order to digest the food. Then, 
the body needs time to restore the digestive fire/ 
enzymes for the future. If a person takes food be- 


fore digesting the previous meal completely, the 
food will not digest properly. The undigested food 
is pushed along the GI tract by normal peristalsis, 
imbalancing and aggravating the doshas. 

Combinations Combining vegetables with fruit or 
milk can cause digestive problems. One needs to 
be careful while eating or choosing food. Differ¬ 
ent combinations may be harmful. Its not advised 
to combine sour tastes with milk, eat cold items 
after ghee, eat equal amounts of ghee and honey, 
or eat fish products along with dairy (these un¬ 
healthy combinations create subtle toxins). Other 
aggravating foods are too hot and too cold, or too 
light and too heavy. Stew and curry are more di¬ 
gestible than individual vegetables cooked and 
eaten separately. 

Vayu— the fewer combinations the better (they 
like combining foods, though it is not good for 
them). 

Pitta— does best with combinations 

Kapha— is between Vayu and Pitta. 

Spices Delicious tastes improve digestion, strength, 
senses, complexion, and a healthy weight. They 
are easily digested and help Apdna Vayu. The use 
of spices stimulates the secretions of digestive en¬ 
zymes. Over-salted, under-salted, or sour season¬ 
ing is to be avoided. Foods that are too tasty in¬ 
crease rajas (aggravating the blood). Foods that 
are too bland cause tamas (suppressing agni). 

Vayu—does well with rich and moderately 
strong spices. 

Pitta—needs only mild spices. 

Kapha—does best with light, strongly spiced 
foods. 


Frame of Mind A relaxed, calm mind promotes 
easy assimilation of food. This makes the mind 
more sattwic. A nervous, anxious, angry, noisy, and 
rushed mind makes the food harder to digest. 
Smoky environments are also harmful when eat¬ 
ing. 





The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Silence is good, but there is no need to be too 
serious. A prayer of gratitude to the Creator and 
Supplier before a meal, or offering the food to ben¬ 
efit humanity and the creation of beings is advised. 
Chew food properly to digest and absorb nutrients. 

Time daylight hours are the best hours to eat. 
Vayu—dawn and dusk (smaller, more frequent 
meals—eat every 3 to 4 hours) Pitta—at noon, larg¬ 
est meal (three meals daily) Kapha—daylight 
hours, breakfast is skipped make lunch the large 
meal After meals, it is good to take a short, easy 
walk. Some say napping while lying on your left 
side helps digest foods This causes breathing 
through the right nostril or “solar” breathing, which 
increases the digestive heat or fire in the system. 
Other authorities say napping after meals is un¬ 
wholesome. Activities such as exercise, swimming, 
or sex are not recommended just before or after 
meals. Smoking disperses and dulls the agni (di¬ 
gestive) fire. 

Season and Geography Eat foods and herbs ac¬ 
cording to season (i.e., do not eat cold and dry items 
in the winter, or hot and pungent items in the sum¬ 
mer). Eat foods and herbs according to geography 
(do not eat hot and dry items in a hot dry desert, or 
cold and oily items in cold and damp climates). 

Miscellaneous Do not ingest equal amounts of 
ghee and honey simultaneously (it becomes a 
subtle toxin). Do not break with eating habits (e.g., 
someone who generally eats cold and sweet things 
should not suddenly start eating hot and pungent 
items). Herbs, diet, and lifestyle are recommended 
to balance the dosha, but also should be in har¬ 
mony with one’s own habits. Intake of substances 
that aggravate the dosha and state of one’s strength 
is ill advised. Eat after clearing the bowel and uri¬ 
nary bladder, and only when hungry. 

Drinking (except lassi buttermilk [yogurt and 
water], and medicated herbal wine to stimulate 


digestion) is not recommended during the meal, 
but is all right afterwards. Drinking alcohol after 
meals causes hyperacidity unless it is medicated 
herbal wines for Vayu and Kapha. Astringent or 
herbal teas are all right after meals, but coffee pro¬ 
motes indigestion, hyperacidity, or ulcers. 

Desserts (especially cold) are heavy and sweet, 
and suppress digestive fire, causing fermentation 
and indigestion. They are better before meals, as 
sweets are the first taste to be digested. Having 
raw foods and salads at the end of the meal is bet¬ 
ter for digestion. Other authorities say a little sweet 
after meals promotes digestion. 

Age/Gender these characteristics may bring ex¬ 
cess to one’s dosha. Therefore, reduction of doshas 
may need to be considered at different ages, and 
for different genders. 

Kapha reduction is predominantly used from birth 
to age 15, and for women. Pitta reduction is pri¬ 
marily from age 15 to 55 years old, and for men. 
Vayu reduction occurs at age 55 and over. 

Ama: For 1 or 2 weeks, spices and a light and 
cleansing diet are followed. Spices are given to 
digest the undigested food or ama and cleanse the 
entire body. Sugars, oils, meat, and dairy are 
avoided. Then, one returns to their dosha diet, stay¬ 
ing on the light side until ama is completely gone. 
Different books offer varying dosha food lists. 
Ultimately, persons will have to decide whether 
any specific food is good or aggravating their 
dosha. 

Vegetarianism: Proteins, Vitamins, and Miner¬ 
als 

Each year more and more people decide to be¬ 
come vegetarians. Yet the major question asked at 
our center is how one gets enough protein, vita¬ 
mins, and minerals in their diet. 

It is true that active people who follow a veg¬ 
etarian diet need sufficient amounts of these nutri- 





Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 6: Nutrition 


ents. Proteins are best derived from milk, yogurt, 
and high-protein content beans like garbanzos 
(■channel dal ) and tur dal (both found in Indian gro¬ 
ceries). They can be mixed with mungdal, which 
also has high protein content, but not as much as 
the other two beans. Boiled milk can be taken once 
or twice a day. Yogurt/ water ( lassi ) can be taken 
once or twice a day between 10 a.m. and sunset. 
Beans can be mixed together and eaten for lunch 
and dinner. 

For an ample supply of vitamins and minerals, 
a mixture of green leafy vegetables, root veg¬ 
etables, and colored vegetables (e.g., eggplant, 
yellow squash) need to be eaten daily. The amount 
of vegetables must be increased as well. 

When all the beans and vegetables (each ben¬ 
eficial for various doshas ) are eaten together in one 
meal, their properties balance, without aggravate 
any one dosha. However, when a dosha is severely 
unbalanced, certain foods may be required in 
smaller quantities—or not at all—until balance is 
restored. 


Foods When no Sanskrit name exists and a Hindi 
name is available, it will be marked with an ‘H\ V, 
P, and K stand for Vayu, Pitta, and Kapha respec¬ 
tively. Various books offer differing energetics for 
certain foods. In fact, the same food grown in dif¬ 
ferent locations may develop different energetics. 
It is up to the individual to determine how each 
food affects them. 


Precautions'. Its ether and cooling effects can cause 
spacey, ungrounded symptoms. It can 
overly diffuse our aura, becoming too sensitive and 
physically vulnerable (as when living in cities or 
having stressful lifestyles). Excess can aggravate 
Vayu air and Kapha mucus, edema, fatigue 
Gunas: Fruit is the most sattwic of all foods, pro¬ 
moting lightness, clarity, harmony, content, intel¬ 
ligence, and sciclhana (though it does not stimu¬ 
late us to do mental work) 

Preparation'. Dry: K- V+ 

Fruit Juices'. P- (sweet) KV+ 

Cooked: VK- P+ 

Sour Fruit with Salt: V- PK+ 

Sour Fruit with Sugar: P ok 
Sweet fruits: VP- K+ 

Sour fruits: VK- P+ 

Bitterfruits: PK- V+ 

Combinations: It is best not to combine certain 
foods. Sour fruits (lemons, grapefruit), pineapples, 
papaya, cranberries, may be taken with meals. 
Grains can be eaten with fruit, especially rice. 
Bananas are ok with mi lk 
Time: Sweet- afternoon 

Kapha—fruit is not eaten in the morning, a Kapha 
increasing time 

Season: Fruit eaten in season and ripened natu¬ 
rally is best. It is too cold for a sole diet, especially 
in winter 

Antidote: Warm sweet spices, ginger, cardamom, 
cloves, cinnamon, and nutmeg. Cooking fruit also 
helps. 


Fruit 


Fruit List 


Taste: Sweet and sour (sometimes astringent) 
Energy: Cold 

Post-Digestive: Sweet VP- K+ (mildly): Balances 
the three humors. The most sattwic food 
Actions: Relieves thirst, refrigerant, alterative, laxa¬ 
tive, mildly cleanses and nurtures, ama only in 
excess 

Elements: Water, ether (more than any other food 
group) 

Tissues: Builds plasma (rasa), cleanses blood, re¬ 
duces other tissues in excess, lightness and purity 
in body 


(The taste/energy/post-digestive effects will be 
listed in this fashion.). Where available, Sanskrit 
names will be provided for each food. 

Apples 

Energetics: Sweet, astringent, sometimes sour/ 
cold/sweet. PK- V+ (in excess, cooked with cin¬ 
namon is neutral =) 

Action: Astringent, alterative, refrigerant 
Indications: Diarrhea, intestinal bleeding or ulcers 
(pectin binds the stool and promotes healing of 
damaged membranes), bleeding gums, gall blad- 









The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


der, inflammations, blood cholesterol, detoxifies, 
chronic enteritis, Pitta and Kapha arthritis, herpes, 
viruses, acid stomach, fiber, chelates metals, pro¬ 
tects from x-ray radiation, blood pressure; baked 
apples or sour apples are better for Vayu. Apple 
juice is good for gastritis, colitis, and burning in¬ 
fections. Apple skin is high in calcium. 

Apricots 

Energetics'. Sweet, sour/hot/sweet VK- P+ mildly 
and in excess 

Action'. Relieves thirst, anti-cough 
Indications'. Fever, constipation, cancer, skin, 
muscle, and nerve disorders, fiber. 


Bananas 

Energetics'. Sweet, astringent/hot/sour V- K+ P+ 
in excess or ulcers. (Unripe: astringent PK-, V+) 
Action'. Astringent, refrigerant, laxative, nutritive, 
tonic, heavy, strengthening, aphrodisiac 
Indications: Unripe—diarrhea, dysentery, cough, 
lung bleeding, infants and young children, nerves, 
alcoholism, Vayu hypertension, heart disorders, 
protects against strokes, diarrhea, hemorrhoids, 
high in potassium, vitamin C, and carbohydrates. 
When taken with ghee and cardamom, bananas 
alleviate hypoglycemia, constipation, and muscle 
cramps; also build muscle and fat; and nerve and 
reproductive tissues. 

Precautions: Not used for Pitta with ulcers, hard 
to digest, do not drink liquids for one hour after 
eating a banana. They are not be eaten with milk 
or yogurt, or eaten when suffering from fever, 
edema, vomiting, or cough with mucus. 

Cherries 

Energetics: Sweet, sour, astringent/hot/ sweet V- 
K+ in excess P+ sour ones VK- P+ 

Action: Alterative (blood cleansing) 

Indications: Mental fatigue, insomnia, stress, heart 
tonic, blood and plasma building, gout, lumbago, 
motion sickness, poor vision, rheumatism, paraly¬ 
sis, arthritis, stunted growth, obesity, (Black cher¬ 




ries ( Bipem kanta) better for plasma, tooth decay 
or loose teeth, diarrhea, glands, detoxifies, gall 
bladder and liver disorders), juice is stronger. For 
PMS and menstrual flow, eat 10 cherries on an 
empty stomach for seven days before menstrua¬ 
tion begins. 

Cranberries 

Energetics: Astringent, sour/hot/pungent. KVK+ 
Action: Diuretic, alterative, hemostatic 
Indications: Excellent for kidney, urethra, and blad¬ 
der disorders, asthma, intestinal antiseptic, high in 
vitamin C. Pitta conditions, burning urine, urinary 
tract stones and infections, skin rashes, toxic blood, 
edema, weight reduction (avoid store-bought juices 
with sugar). 

Dates {Kharjura) 

Energetics: Sweet/cold/sweet VP- K+ in excess. 
V+ if dry 

Action: Nutritive, tonic, aphrodisiac, one of the best 
fruit strengtheners, demulcent, laxative, refriger¬ 
ant, febrifuge, expectorant 

Indications: Tonic with almonds, restorative with 
milk or kefir, for weak children, lung disease, con¬ 
valescence, febrile disease, asthma, increase se¬ 
men, strengthens reproductive systems (may be 
added to herbal formulas as tonic). Good for wast¬ 
ing diseases and injuries. Date sugar is a good 
source of iron. Good for cough, gonorrhea. Plan¬ 
tain, Dates, Coconut: Sweet-cold-sweet. VP- K+. 
relieves burning, lungs, TB, bleeding; increases 
reproductive fluid, hard to digest. 

Figs {Anjira) 

Energetics: Sweet, astringent/cold/sweet VPK+ 
Dry V+ 

Action: Nutritive, demulcent, laxative, antibacte¬ 
rial, aperient, emollient 

Indications: Urinary tract and gall bladder stones, 
liver, kidneys, chronic cough, increase weight, 
destroys roundworms, hemorrhoids, cancer, diges¬ 
tive disorders, high in fiber. Figs are a good source 
of iron and an excellent blood builder. Taken in 
the morning with a pinch of pippall, help asthma. 
Chewing figs strengthens teeth, tongue, and gums. 
Research indicates figs shrink cancerous tumors. 









Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 6: Nutrition 


More calcium than milk, more potassium than ba¬ 
nanas. 


Grapes ( Draksha , Mridvika) 

Energetics : Green: sour/hot/pungent V- PK+ 
Purple, red or black: Sweet/cold/sweet V- PK+ 
Action : Refrigerant, thirst relieving, nutritive, de¬ 
mulcent, diuretic, and hemostatic, laxative, aph¬ 
rodisiac 

Indications : They are said to be the best of the 
fruits; and provide immediate relief from thirst, 
burning, fever, difficult or painful breathing, bleed¬ 
ing, consumption, wasting, Vayu and Pitta feces 
retention, hoarseness, alcoholism, dry mouth, and 
cough. They help the eyes, blood (rich in iron), 
and elimination of urine and feces; lungs, TB. They 
help anemia, heart disease, and palpitations, diffi¬ 
cult or burning urine, thrush in children, colds, 
jaundice, chronic bronchitis, Bright’s disease, gout, 
edema, cancer, detoxification biliousness, acid¬ 
ity, liver stimulant, energy, skin disorders, consti¬ 
pation, prevents gum disease and tooth decay; and 
cleanse all tissues and glands. Black grapes build 
blood. The juice is used for fevers. Raisins taken 
with herbs are a blood tonic; for debility, sweeten 
and harmonize stomach; less likely to aggravate 
Kapha; contains many vitamins and minerals. Eat¬ 
ing a handful of raisins daily helps with enlarged 
liver and spleen. Drinking soaked raisin water and 
the raisins each morning improves digestion. Re¬ 
search indicates grapes and raisins may prevent 
cancer. 

Grapefruit 

Energetics'. Sour/hot/sour V- P+ K liquefy/ dis¬ 
charge or + 

Action : Stimulant, expectorant, astringent 
Indications: Discharges phlegm when taken in the 
morning, digests sugars and fats, weight reduction, 
stimulates liver and pancreas, cardiovascular heal¬ 
ing, protects the arteries, cancer preventive, cho¬ 
lesterol, high in vitamin C and potassium. Seeds 
heal Candida and are an antibiotic. 



Guava ( Perala ; Amruta-phalam; Anjira) 

Energetics: Sweet/cold or hot 
Indications: Excessive digestion and metabolism, 
anorexia, gout. As a jelly it is a heart tonic and 
anticonstipative. Soaked in water—relieves thirst 
due to diabetes. Unripe—diarrhea. 

Precaution: When the fruit is raw, the rind and the 
pulp should be eaten together to prevent constipa¬ 
tion. Guava is heavy and hard to 

Lemon ( Limpaka ) 

Energetics: Sour, astringent/hot/sour V- P+ excess 
K- fat K+ plasma 

Action: Laxative, refrigerant, relieves thirst, expec¬ 
torant, astringent, digestive stimulant (juice) sto¬ 
machic, peel-digestive stimulant 
Indications: Summer heat, sunstroke ( especially 
with salt), fevers, hot-dry skin; thirst, stops bleed¬ 
ing of lungs, kidney, uterus, and GI tract; inflam¬ 
mation, colds, flu, sore throat, bronchitis, asthma, 
digestive disorders, diabetes, scurvy, fevers, rheu¬ 
matism, arthritis, gout, neuralgia; juice—heartburn, 
sore throat gargle, swollen or bleeding gums; 
cleanses the blood stream; with honey—rids 
phlegm discharge and fat reduction; stimulates bile 
flow; dissolves gall stones; peel—regulates liver, 
spleen, and pancreas; digests sugars and sweets. It 
will detoxify balanced Pitta doshas. Lemon juice 
and honey relieve nausea, vomiting, indigestion, 
and mucus. Juice with baking soda and water re¬ 
lieves gas and indigestion. Juice with cilantro juice 
in water relieves kidney stones and urinary gravel. 
External use—insect bites, nerve pain, disinfec¬ 
tant. 

Precautions: Do not take with milk, mangos, to¬ 
matoes, or when suffering from a peptic ulcer 

Lime ( Karkatika ) 

Energetics: Sour, slightly bitter/cold/sweetVP-t- in 
excess—K+, fat, plasma 

Action: Juice—digestive stimulant. Peel—stimu¬ 
lant, stomachic, expectorant 
Indications: Counters the effects of alcohol, pal¬ 
pitations, malaria fevers, throat gargle, a glass of 
hot water and 1 teaspoon each of lime and honey, 
in the morning, relieves obesity and cholesterol. 



& 





The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Peel—increases energy to liver; with salt—sun¬ 
stroke or summer heat. 



Mango ( Arnra ) 

Energetics : Yellow-ripe Mangos: Sweet/hot/sweet 
VP- K+. Green-unripe mangos: sour, astringent/ 
cold/pungent VK- P+ (except when prepared as 
chutney) 

Action : Demulcent, diuretic, astringent, refriger¬ 
ant, skin-astringent 

Indications : Nervous or weak digestion, constipa¬ 
tion, vitality, strength, semen, skin, atonic indiges¬ 
tion. Bark infusions, or skin—diarrhea, dysentery, 
hemorrhoids, high in vitamin C. It is good for preg¬ 
nancy and improves lactation. Drinking warm mi lk 
with ghee one hour after eating a ripe mango im¬ 
proves energy and vitality. Unripe or sour aids di¬ 
gestion. Pulp—diabetes, blood pressure. Pickled— 
for colds; seed powder —vaginal discharge; high 
in vitamin C. As chutney, they are eaten with meals, 
improving digestion and enhancing the food’s fla¬ 
vor. 


Melons 

Energetics'. Sweet/cold/sweet P- K+V+ (in excess) 
Action : Refrigerant, febrifuge, diuretic, aphrodi¬ 
siac 

Indications'. Watermelon ( Chayapula )—summer 
heat, sunstroke, fevers, thirst, vexation, irritabil¬ 
ity, burning urine (taken with a pinch of corian¬ 
der), or burning sensations; blood purifier, cleans 
tissues; bleeding gums, canker sores in the mouth; 
high in vitamin A and C, (with seeds V=); antisep¬ 
tic for typhoid fever. With cumin and cane sugar 
the juice helps urinary conditions, intestinal ca¬ 
tarrh, and congested liver; Cantaloupe—milder, is 
better for Vayu. For acne and rashes, and to pro¬ 
mote soft skin—rub melon rind on skin before bed. 
Watermelon binds the stool and flushes the kid¬ 
neys, but only eat them 3 hours after meals. 
Contraindications: Eat alone. Watermelon—do not 
eat at night or when cloudy (this causes edema or 
abdominal pain). Eating them in excess causes res¬ 
piratory problems. Not eaten with glaucoma 



Oranges ( Swadu-naringa ) 

Energetics'. Sweet or sour/hot/sweet 
or pungent V- K+ P+ excess or sour 
variety. Sweet is the best variety 
Action'. Stimulant, expectorant, appetizer, refrig¬ 
erant, relieves thirst; peel—stimulant, carminative 
Indications: Counters cough, diabetes, bronchitis, 
liver, heart disorders, vomiting, harmonizes stom¬ 
ach; high in vitamin C and A. A glass of fresh or¬ 
ange juice with a pinch of rock salt restores en¬ 
ergy after exercising (Pitta doshas add 10 lemon 
drops). A blood purifier, with meals for bile and 
scurvy; For babies—equal parts with water every 
3 hours with mother’s milk for stomach disorders. 
For children with anemia or nervous debility, mix 
grape and orange juice. 

Precautions: Avoid with joint pain or bladder dis¬ 
orders 



Papaya (Papita - H) 

Energetics: Sweet, sour/hot/sweet V- PK+ P+ in 
excess 

Action: Digestive aid, toning, demulcent, stimu¬ 
lant, laxative 

Indications: Convalescence, digestive disorders, 
pancreas, regulates sugar metabolism, cough, 
worms, asthma, back pain, colon disorders, liver 
and spleen disorders; chronic illness, seeds—em- 
menagogue, for abortion; unripe juice— 
antiparasitical, blood thinner, prevents heart attack. 
Externally—the inner skin of the fruit is rubbed 
on one’s skin for eczema and dermatitis. 


Peaches (Aru - H) 

Energetics: Sweet, astringent, or sour/hot/sweet or 
pungent V- PK+ (V+ sometimes. One peach daily 
K-) 

Action: Demulcent, laxative, refrigerant 
Indications: Fever, cough, seeds—anti-cough/laxa¬ 
tive, menstruation, colon worms, heal damaged tis¬ 
sues; leaves—allay nausea, vomiting; high in vi¬ 
tamin A, potassium, fiber; cancer, heart disease, 
Nectarines are safer for Pitta. 

Contraindications: Skin aggravates in excess or 
acute Pitta conditions (i.e., rash) 






Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 6: Nutrition 


Pears ( Aruk ) 

Energetics'. Sweet or astringent/cold/ 
sweet or pungent PK- V+_(unless 
baked) K+ (sweet) 

Action : Nutritive, demulcent, laxative, tonic, feb¬ 
rifuge, anti-cough 

Indications'. Lung tonic, diabetes, diarrhea, con¬ 
valescence from lung disease (with cardamom, 
cloves, ginger, cinnamon); fevers, poor appetite, 
biliousness, hyperacidity, chronic gall bladder dis¬ 
orders, excessive thirst, gout, stomach disorders, 
laxative (eaten on an empty stomach), enlarged 
liver, gonorrhea, hemorrhoids. 

Precautions'. Do not eat with arthritis, diabetes, dry 
cough or sciatica. 

Pineapple (Ananas- H) 

Energetics'. Sweet or sour/cold or hot/ 
sweet or pungent V- KP+ (sour or unripe) 
sweet in moderation 
Action : Diuretic, refrigerant, laxative, digestive 
stimulant, anti-scurvy, diaphoretic 
Indications'. Cleanses the liver, biliousness, acid¬ 
ity, jaundice, counters the effects of alcohol. Juice 
relieves constipation and gastric irritability in fe¬ 
vers. To reduce cigarette smoking and nicotine tox¬ 
icity, chew small pieces of the fruit with half a tea¬ 
spoon of raw honey. It digests albuminous (pro¬ 
tein) substances. Contains high amounts of easily 
assimilated manganese (which may prevent os¬ 
teoporosis). 

Precautions'. Juice will aggravate Pitta. Not given 
to children under 7 years old. Not eaten on an 
empty stomach in the morning. Not taken within 
two hours of ingesting dairy products. Unripe pine¬ 
apples may cause abortion 

Plums 

Energetics'. Sweet, sour, astringent/hot/sweet VP- 
K+ P+ sour European—sweet, Japan sweet/sour 
Chinese black plum ( Umeboshi )—sour 
(antiparasitical, anti-cough, digestion) 

Action'. Refrigerant, relieves thirst, alterative, laxa¬ 
tive 

Indications'. Fever, dry cough. 





Pomegranate (Dadima) 

Energetics'. Sweet, astringent, sour/hot, cold / 
sweet, pungent PK- V+ (sweet); (P+ sour) 

Action : Astringent, alterative, hemostatic, rind 
antiparasitical 

Indications'. The sour, astringent, sweet variety is 
the best. Builds red blood cells (juice), cleanses 
bile, blood, bilious indigestion, gall stones, hypera¬ 
cidity, fever, intermittent or malarial fever; diar¬ 
rhea, dysentery, excessive perspiration, gargle for 
sore throats; leukorrhea, tapeworm. They are good 
for the heart, mind, anemia, and as a digestive aid. 
Pomegranate binds the bowels, cardiac tonic, 
hoarseness. 


Raspberries/Blackberries/Blueberries 



Energetics'. Sweet, sour, astringent (unripe)/cold/ 
pungent PK- V+ 

Action: Refrigerant, relieves thirst, astringent; un¬ 
ripe—astringent, leaf—astringent, hemostatic, 
Blueberries—alterative refrigerant, astringent (un¬ 
related botanical family) 

Indications'. Unripe—excess urination, nocturnal 
emission, improves sexual vitality, liver 
tonic, diarrhea, Blackberries ( Jambul or 
Rajaphala )—build blood, are good for dysentery 
and diarrhea; goiter, cholera, hemorrhoids, and 
insect bites/stings. The bark is used externally on 
inflammations. The seed powder is useful in dia¬ 
betes, reducing sugar in the urine and excessive 
thirst. Raspberry leaf—miscarriage, morning sick¬ 
ness (nausea). For bleeding gums or excess men¬ 
struation, 10 to 20 raspberries are eaten on an 
empty stomach 2 to 3 times daily. Fruit is useful 
for obesity, gout, arthritis, diabetes, constipation, 
hypertension, kidney stones, and relieving the de¬ 
livery pains of childbirth. Blueberries—regulate 
sugar metabolism and reduce fevers, diarrhea and 
dysentery; help bladder/urinary tract disorders, 
contain tannic acid (destroys viruses). 







The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Precautions'. Eating more than two handfuls of 
raspberries at a time may cause vomiting. Taken 
with dairy products, they can cause hemorrhoids, 
s ki n diseases, and ulcers 

Strawberries 

Energetics: Sweet, sour, astringent (cold or hot/ 
sweet or pungent VP- K (+in excess) 

Action: Refrigerant, relieve thirst, alterative, leaf 
mild astringent, antacid as tea 
Indications: Similar to raspberries; protects against 
viruses, cancer, DNA damage, herpes 
simplex, and skin disorders; high in vitamin C, fi¬ 
ber, potassium, antioxidant. Ten berries daily may 
help anemia and pulmonary TB. Useful for obe¬ 
sity, gout, arthritis, diabetes, constipation, hyper¬ 
tension, and kidney stones. 

Contraindications: Their skin may aggravate Pitta. 
Eating too many can cause coughing and vomit¬ 
ing. They are eaten alone 



fewer problems. 

Diuretics—K- Carrots, celery, lettuce, mustard 
greens, watercress, broccoli, potatoes. 
Preparation: 

Vayu—cooked or steamed, oils and spices, salt and 
pickled ( rajasic) 

Pitta—raw or lightly steamed, vegetable juices, 
Kapha—cooked or steamed. Fresh, organic, home 
or locally grown is sattwic 
Canned food is tamasic, aggravating all humors. 
Combining: Combines well with other foods for 
one’s constitution. Does not combine well with 
fruit or sugars 

Season: It is best to eat vegetables according to 
season (taking into account one’s constitutional 
requirements) 

Spring, Summer—greens, leafy, raw 

Fall, Winter—roots, cooked 

Antidote—cold and raw—ginger, oil, vinegar 

(rajasic), garlic and onions ( rajasic/tamasic ) 

Dry and light—(i.e., cabbage family) oil, butter, 
sour cream, cheese, whole grains, pasta 


Tangerine/Mandarin Orange 

Energetics: Sweet, sour/cold/sweet (more sour than 
oranges) VP- K+ P+ excess 
Action: Refrigerant, relieve thirst, expectorant, 
stimulant 

Indications: Peels—warm, aids appetite, settles 
stomach, vomiting, cough, discharge phlegm— 
especially mandarin peel 

Contraindications: Aggravates acute Pitta condi¬ 
tions 

Vegetables 

Energetics: Pleasant/even/sweet 

Actions: Generally sattwic (but less so than fruit) 

Indications: 

Root— heavier, nutritive, V- K+P= carrots, pota¬ 
toes, sweet potatoes, artichokes, cauliflower (V+). 
Leafy Greens—(including cabbage family) lighter 
PK- V + blood-cleansing, vitamins, minerals, not 
nutritive. 

Pungents—onions, chilies VK- P+ rajasic. 
Nightshades—tomatoes, potatoes, VP- may cause 
allergies, though if cooked they cause 


Alfalfa Sprouts (Lasunghas - H) 

Energetics: Astringent, sweet/cold/pungent PKV+ 
decrease agni 

Actions: Alterative, astringent, diuretic 
Indications: Cleanse blood and lymph, reduce fat 
and tumors, acne, boils, skin cancer, arthritis, gout, 
obesity, edema, vitamins, and minerals. 



Artichoke (Globe) (Kunjor, Hatichuk - H) 

Energetics: Sweet, astringent/hot/sweet PK- V+ 
(butter or lemon is better for Vayu) 

Actions: Alteratives, hemostatics, diuretics 
Indications: Cleanses liver, excess menstruation; 
high in calcium, phosphorus, iron, vitamin C, and 
niacin. 

—Jerusalem Artichoke ( Hastipiju ) 

Energetics: Astringent, bitter/cold/pungent PKV+ 
Actions: Tonic, rejuvenative 
Indications: Rebuilds reproductive tissue, impo¬ 
tence, infertility, sexual debility, vigor, vitality, 
ojas, emaciation, convalescence. 






Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 6: Nutrition 


Asparagus (Marchuba - H) 

Energetics : Sweet, bitter, astringent/cold/sweet 
VPK= 

Actions'. Diuretic, alterative, mild laxative, demul¬ 
cent, tonic, aphrodisiac, sedative 
Indications'. High Pitta, bleeding disorders or in¬ 
fections of urinary or reproductive systems (includ¬ 
ing venereal disease like herpes and for urinary 
stones), fever, edema (and cardiac edema), gout, 
arthritis. Drinking boiled asparagus water helps 
rheumatism. 


Avocado 

Energetics'. Astringent/cold/sweet VP- K+ best 
taken with spices 

Actions'. Tonic, nutritive, demulcent, emollient 
Indications: Nourishes liver, lungs, skin, builds 
muscle and blood, emaciation, convalescence, hy¬ 
poglycemia reduces the risk of heart attacks; high 
in protein, contains vitamins A, D, E; high in min¬ 
erals, especially copper and iron; rich in phospho¬ 
rus, magnesium, calcium, sodium, and manganese; 
more potassium than bananas. 



Indications: Build blood, promote menstruation; 
juice more medicinal (and aggravate PK). Beet 
greens have same effects as spinach; lymph func¬ 
tioning, gall bladder, and liver; digestive disorders, 
anemia (build red blood cells). 

Bell Pepper (Deshomaricha - H) 

Energetics: Sweet, astringent/cold/sweet PKV+ 
Actions: Alterative, refrigerant 

Bitter Melon ( Karela ) 

Energetics: Bitter/cold/pungent PK- V+ 

Actions: Antipyretic, alterative, antacid, 
antiparasitical 

Indications: Excellent for diabetes; kidney stones, 
intestinal worms, parasites, cleanses liver, bile, 
blood, reduces weight, tumors, fever, diarrhea, 
anemia, summer use, high in vitamin C. 



Cabbage Family 

Energetics: Astringent, sweet/cold/pungent PKV+ 
rajasic 

Actions: Alterative, may prevent colon cancer 


Beans/Greens 

Energetics: Sweet, astringent/hot/sweet PK- V+ 
excess 

Actions: Alterative, diuretic, astringent 
Indications: Cleanses blood and liver, gout, nor¬ 
malize liver and pancreas; rheumatism, contain 
vitamins A, B-complex, C, chlorophyll, carbohy¬ 
drates, calcium, phosphorous, copper, cobalt, trace 
source of inositol. 

Bean (Mung) Sprouts 

Energetics: Astringent, sweet/cold/sweet PKV+ 
excess 

Actions: Alterative, antacid, febrifuge 
Indications: Counter toxins, cleanses liver and bile; 
alcoholism, hyperacidity. 


Beets (Chukander - H) 

Energetics: Sweet/hot/sweet V- PK+ excess 
Actions: Alterative, demulcent, laxative, tonic 



Broccoli —astringent/cold/pungent PKV H alter¬ 
ative, blood cleanser, lowers the risk of cancer of 
the esophagus, larynx, lung, prostate, mouth, co¬ 
lon, pharynx, cervix, and stomach, tumor. 

Brussels Sprouts (Kobi - H) —astringent/hot/ pun¬ 
gent PK- V-i—inhibits cancer of the G.I. tract, liver, 
stomach, and colon; liver tumors, promotes pan¬ 
creatic insulin; rich in vitamins A, C, riboflavin, 
iron, potassium, fiber; depresses thyroid function. 

Cabbage {Kobi - H) and Chinese Cabbage 

— astringent/cold/pungent PK- V-i—gas forming, 
Chinese variety is easier to digest. 

Heals ulcers, eczema, infections, heartburn, anti¬ 
bacterial, antiviral, prevents cancer, scurvy, eye 
diseases, gout, rheumatism, pyorrhea, asthma, TB, 
gangrene; blood purifier, rashes, high in calcium, 
vitamin C and A, sulfur. White cabbage juice re¬ 
moves warts. 







The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Cauliflower (Phulkobi - H)— 

astringent/cold/ pungent PK- 
Vh— more sweet and sattwic 
than the others, demulcent, nu¬ 
tritive, combines well with dairy; 
reduces the risk of cancer (especially rectum, co¬ 
lon and stomach). It is better for diabetics than 
cabbage. Kale —blood cleanser, one of the best 
cancer lighting vegetables (lung, stomach, esoph¬ 
ageal, colon, mouth, throat, G.I., breast, bowel, 
bladder, prostate); rich in vitamin A, C, riboflavin, 
niacin, calcium, magnesium, iron, sulfur, sodium, 
potassium, phosphorus, and chlorophyll; calcium 
is easily assimilated. 


Actions'. Astringent, diuretic, nervine; seeds and 
roots—diuretic, seeds are hot, stimulant, carmina¬ 
tive, emmenagogue, antispasmodic, (similar to 
ajwan —wild celery seeds) 

Indications'. Cleanses mind, emotions, perception, 
increases ether to promote meditation 
(Closely related to gotu kola Jbrdhmi in this effect); 
dizziness, headache, eliminates carbon dioxide, 
Pitta and Kapha arthritis; adrenal disorders, weight 
loss, blood cleanser, urogenital infections, pro¬ 
motes digestion, kidney and liver disorders; regu¬ 
lates the nervous system, water retention, diabe¬ 
tes, cancer; lowers blood pressure; seeds and 
roots—dissolve stones, arthritis, gout. 



Carrots ( Shikha-mulam ) 

Energetics'. Sweet, astringent/hot/sweet or pungent 
VK- P+ excess; juice V+ due to its cold nature, 
sweet nature makes it hard to digest 
Actions: Digestive, laxative, diuretic, appetite 
stimulant, alterative, antiseptic; seeds—stimulant, 
antispasmodic, emmenagogue 
Indications: Increase blood flow, build blood, 
brighten eyes, rickets, colitis, gout, constipation, 
worms (eaten raw), arthritis, skin disorders, edema, 
jaundice, chronic hepatitis, antioxidant, heal s ki n 
and tissues; heart disease, reduce the risk of lung 
cancer; diarrhea, healthy teeth, colon disorders, 
dehydration, complexion. One cup of juice with 2 
teaspoons of cilantro juice, taken twice daily on 
an empty stomach, relieves hemorrhoids. 

For chronic indigestion, a glass of juice is taken 
with a pinch of ginger powder. One half 
cup of juice mixed with one half cup aloe vera juice, 
and taken twice daily, helps reduce cancer. Exter¬ 
nally—poultice for malodorous, ulcerative sores. 
Contraindications: May cause colic in babies. 


Chilies—Hot Peppers (Jhal - H) 

Energetics: Pungent/hot/pungent VK- P++ 
Agni++ ( rajasic) 

Actions: Stimulant, diaphoretic, digestive, decon¬ 
gestant 

Indications: Burns ama , appetite, indigestion, para¬ 
sites, lungs (asthma, bronchitis, emphysema, tra¬ 
cheal and bronchial cell swelling), blood clots, 
pain. 

Cilantro (Coriander leaf) ( Dhyanyaka, 
Kustumbari) 

Energetics: Sweet, astringent/cold/sweet VPK= 
(balanced) V+ excess 

Actions: Stimulant, diuretic, diaphoretic, febrifuge 
Indications: Skin allergies, hay fever, builds the 
digestive fire, sore throat, hyperacidity, nausea, 
fever, colds, thirst, cleanses blood, bile and uri¬ 
nary tract infections; juice—burning urine; anti¬ 
dote to hot and sour foods (i.e., salsa, chilies, cur¬ 
ries, yogurt). Externally—pulp placed on eyelids 
relieves conjunctivitis; juice—skin diseases 






Celery ( Ajmoda ) 

Energetics: Astringent, sweet, salty/cold/pungent 
PK- V + (needed minerals for all three humors) 


Corn (sweet) ( Yavanala ) 

Energetics: Sweet, astringent/hot/sweet or pungent 
K- VP+ excess 

Actions: Balanced, com silk- diuretic 
Indications: Strengthening, corn silk—jaundice, 
hepatitis, gall and kidney stones; urinary tract in- 








Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 6: Nutrition 


fections, edema, brain and nervous system tonic; 
helps gain weight; bone and muscle builder; vita¬ 
mins A, B, C, potassium, phosphorus, iron, zinc, 
potassium, magnesium, fiber. 

Precautions'. Avoid with digestive disorders or 
obesity 



Cucumber ( Sakusa, Kira ) 

Energetics'. Sweet, astringent/cold/sweet VPK+ 
Actions: Refrigerant, diuretic; seeds—better diuret¬ 
ics, febrifuges 

Indications'. Eaten as a raw dessert mixed with 
lemon juice, pepper, and salt, enables the body to 
absorb the maximum amount of the cucumber’s 
juice and vitamins. Summer food, thirst relieving, 
urinary tract infections—difficult or scanty urine, 
spleen and stomach disorders, acne, blood puri¬ 
fier; seeds—dispels phlegm and heat from the 
lungs. Antidote to heavy, sticky yogurt properties. 
Seeds are cooling, diuretic, and highly nourishing. 
There is a poem in India about Kira; 


Kira shuba me him 
Kira dopaher me jira 
Kira sham me pirn 


Cucumber in the morning is diamond 
Cucumber in the afternoon is cumin (digestive) 
Cucumber in the evening is pain 



Eggplant ( Vartdka )— listed as a fruit in Charak 
Energetics'. Pungent, astringent, bitter/hot/pungent 
VK- P+ [Only the tender variety] (V antidote with 
spices) 

Actions'. Nutritive, demulcent, anticarcinogenic, 
anticonvulsant 

Indications'. Long size increase Vayu and Kapha. 
Food value, convalescence from febrile diseases; 
heart tonic, appetite stimulant, mild laxative and 
diuretic; dull vision, diabetes, cholesterol, arterio¬ 
sclerosis, immune boosting, convulsions, epilepsy. 
Contraindications : Nightshade may aggravate al¬ 
lergies, Pitta, and arthritis 


Garlic 

See Chapter 4—Herbal materia medica. 

Lettuce (Kahu, Salad - H) 

Energetics'. Pleasant, astringent/cold/sweet or pun¬ 
gent PK- V+ 

Actions: Alterative, astringent, diuretic 
Indications: Calms and cleanses mind, emotions, 
blood, lymph, burning. 

Mushrooms 

Energetics: Sweet, astringent/hot/pungent PKV+ 
ama+ ( tamasic ) 

Actions: Diuretic, astringent, hemostatic, Some 
Chinese and Japanese varieties; and wild mush¬ 
rooms are less tamasic and more toning 
Indications: Edema, overweight, antitumor, 
anticarcinogenic, reduce cholesterol, longevity. 
Contraindications: Do not eat with boils, car¬ 
buncles, pus infections 

Mustard Greens 

Energetics: Pungent, bitter/hot/pungent VK- P+ 
moderately 

Actions: Stimulant, expectorant 
Indications: Seeds discharge phlegm better than 
greens; high amounts of calcium, iron, vitamin A, 
and niacin. 

Okra ( Tindisha ) 

Energetics: Sweet, astringent/cold/sweet PKV+ 
Actions: Demulcent, emollient, diuretic, alterative, 
aphrodisiac, tonic, (mallow plant family) 
Indications: Difficult, painful, or burning urine; 
diarrhea, dysentery, spermatorrhea, leukorrhea, 
strengthening, gonorrhea, intestinal disorders, in¬ 
flamed or spastic colon, diverticulitis, stomach ul¬ 
cers, fever. 

Onions (Durgandha, Palandu ) 

Energetics: Cooked—sweet/hot/sweet VK- P+ 
Raw—pungent/hot/pungent K- VP+ Rajasic except 
when thoroughly cooked 

Actions: Stimulant, diaphoretic, aphrodisiac, expec¬ 
torant 

Indications: Colds, flu, general debility, sexual de¬ 
bility; with oil or ghee strengthening properties of 


,fe- ^ 





The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


meat, aid for physical exertion. Inhale raw onions 
(until tearing begins) for fainting and convulsions. 

Parsley 

Energetics'. Pungent, astringent/hot/pungent VPK= 
P+ excess 

Actions'. Stimulant, diuretic, alterative, emmenag- 
ogue 

Indications'. Edema, oozing skin rashes, difficult 
or delayed menstruation; gall stones, vitamins, 
hypochondriac pain, kidney stones, minerals, blood 
and lymph cleanser; urinary tract disorders, kid¬ 
ney, bladder or prostate disorders; adrenal and thy¬ 
roid gland conditions; corrects vitamin deficiency, 
high in vitamins A, Bl, B-complex, C, potassium, 
manganese, phosphorus, calcium, and iron. 

Peas (Green or Snow) ( Sahila, Vartula) 

Energetics: Astringent/cold/pungent PK - V+ (green 
better for Vayu) 

Actions: Alterative, astringent 
Indications: Blood cleanser, prevents appendicitis 
and ulcers, antifertility, lowers cholesterol, controls 
blood sugar, lowers blood pressure, low-calorie 
protein, anti-carcinogen, high fiber. 

Potatoes (Alu - H) 

Energetics: Pleasant, astringent/ 
cold/sweet PKV+ (curried is best) [may aggravate 
VP as a nightshade] V: Use ghee or butter 
Actions: Nutritive, tonic, diuretic, sedative 
(grounds), produces breast milk 
Indications: Strengthening, diarrhea, absorption, 
cancer, blood pressure, balances alkalinity and 
acidity. 

Precautions: Avoid with diabetes, gout, stones, rash, 
arthritis. 

Radish (Mfdaka) 

Energetics: Pungent, astringent/hot/pungent KP+; 
V- (long white variety). 

Actions: Appetite stimulant, expectorant, anticough, 
diuretic, antiparasitical 

Indications: Digests heavy food, colds, flu, respira¬ 
tory infections, cleanses gall bladder and liver; head¬ 
aches, laryngitis, sinusitis, gall stones, intestinal 





worms, contains vitamin A, B-complex, and C. 

Sea Vegetables 

Seaweed 

Energetics: Salty, astringent/cold/sweetVPK= VP- 
K+ excess 
Actions: Alterative 

Indications: Minerals, plasma, edema, congestion, 
thyroid, cysts, benign tumors. Dulse; Rich in pro¬ 
tein, fluoride, iron Irish Moss/Kelp; High in cal¬ 
cium, potassium, magnesium, iron; excellent for 
thyroid disorders Kuzu; Gives quick energy Nori; 
Good for prostate and thyroid disorders, high in 
protein, B1, B2, B6, B12, vitamins C, E 

Spinach (Palak - H) and Chard 

Energetics: Pungent, bitter, sweet, astringent/ cold/ 
pungent or sweet K- PV+ 

Actions: Alterative, refrigerant, demulcent, laxa¬ 
tive 

Indications: Soothes mucus membranes, fever, 
cough, dry cough, burning lung sensation, blood 
cleanser, rich in minerals, intestinal tract disorders, 
hemorrhoids, anemia, vitamin deficiencies. 
Precautions: Do not eat with liver diseases, gall or 
kidney stones or arthritis. It is difficult to digest 

Squash 

—Acorn, Summer (Heavy) 

Energetics: Sweet, astringent/cold/pungent VPK= 
Actions: Demulcent, expectorant, nutritive 

—Winter 

Energetics: Sweet, astringent/hot/pungent VPK+ 
Actions: Demulcent, expectorant 
Indications: More nutritive than summer variety, 
dry cough, laryngitis, high in vitamin A. 

—Zucchini and Yellow 

Energetics: Sweet, astringent/cold/pungent VPK; 
V + excess 

Actions: Alterative, diuretic, refrigerant, expecto¬ 
rant 

Indications: Summer anti-heat food. 

X c __ ^ 

Sweet Potatoes and Yams ( Pindalu ) 

Energetics: Sweet/cold/sweet VP- K+ P+ excess 
Actions: Nutritive 









Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 6: Nutrition 


Indications'. Convalescence, debility, reduces can¬ 
cer risk (especially lungs), high amounts of vitamin 
A/beta carotene, antioxidant properties, high in vi¬ 
tamin C, low in calories. 

Contraindications'. Hard to digest, eat without other 
vegetables. Yams are easier to digest 

Tomatoes {Bilati, Baigun - H) 

Energetics'. Yellow—sweet, sour/heating/pungent 
VPK+ Red—sour, astringent/hot /pungent the 
stomach and heat the intestines/sour VPK+ (when 
raw), VK-P+ when steamed); Tridoshic when oc¬ 
casionally eaten along with cumin, turmeric, and 
mustard 

Actions'. Refrigerant, relieves thirst 
Indications: Circulation, blood, heart, cholesterol, 
hypertension, lowers cancer risk; appendicitis, di¬ 
gestive disorders. 

Contraindications: Aggravates toxic blood condi¬ 
tions, acidity, sciatica, kidney and gall stones, and 
arthritis. Raw seeds can cause abdominal problems. 
A member of the nightshade family 

Turnips ( Raktasarshapa ) and Rutabaga 

Energetics: Pungent, astringent/hot/pungent KVP+ 
rajasic 

Actions: Alterative 

Indications: Blood and lymph cleanser, stops 
bleeding, Pitta or Kapha arthritis; uric acid, kid¬ 
ney stones, overweight, gout; rich in all vitamins 
(high in vitamin C) and sulfur. 



Elements: Earth 
Tissues: Builds all 
Indications: 

Diuretics; nutritive, K+, discharge phlegm, barley, 
pearled barley, com, rye, buckwheat. 

Nutritives; V-, convalescence, wheat, oats, basmati 
and brown rice, (some say barley V-; others say 
barley V+) 

Preparation: Steamed whole grains are balanced 
and easiest to digest 

Breads: Hard to digest, yeast V+, toasted is easier 
to digest and makes them better for V and K 
Pastries: More difficult to digest than bread, espe¬ 
cially if made with refined sugars and flour. 
Unleavened breads: Chapatis, tortillas, matzoh, 
etc., are better than yeast breads 
Pastas/noodles: Good (especially whole wheat) 
Cut/ground: Good—lose their properties quicker 
Oil Fried: (deep fried) harder to digest, PK ama+ 
Dried: (granola, etc.) V+ K-, com chips (fried in 
oil) PK+ & dryness V+, crackers better all around 
Antidoting: Some spices may be helpful, use as 
necessary 

Combinations: Do not eat bread with other foods; 
with steamed vegetables, oil or ghee, VPK=; all 
other grain combinations are ok, but make sure the 
other foods are combinable (i.e., grain and veg¬ 
etables are ok, and grain and fruits are ok, but fruit 
and vegetables may not combine well.) 

Season—good during any season due to holding 
their potency within the seed. Winter is especially 
a good time 


Watercress ( Chandrasura, Ahaliva) 

Indications: Anemia, calcium deficiencies, blood 
purifier, catarrh, liver and pancreas disorders, 
stimulates the appetite, thyroid disorders, arthri¬ 
tis, emotional disorders, TB, high in potassium, 
sulfur, vitamin A, calcium, and iron; contains cop¬ 
per, magnesium, sodium, potassium, and iodine. 



Grain List Jp 

Sweet/neutral/sweet Sattwic, VPK= aggravates in 
excess. Whole grain is the best staple for all cli¬ 
mates and constitutions. 

Actions: Gives bulk to stool, easy to digest 


Grains with pointed ends are best. 

Barley ( Yava ) 

Energetics: Sweet, astringent/cold/sweet PK- V+ in 
excess 

Action: Diuretic, demulcent, antirheumatic 
Indications: Lung disease convalescence, cough, 
fevers, arthritis, edema, water retention, kidneys, 
absorption, diarrhea, cleanses urinary tract, increases 
and bulks stool; reduces body fat and mucus; helps 
difficult breathing, stiff thighs, throat and skin dis¬ 
orders. It is strengthening, stabilizing, heals infec¬ 
tions, and removes toxins. Prevents cholesterol ab- 








The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


sorption in the intestines and aids the suppression 
of cholesterol in the liver. Stimulates the liver and 
lymphatic system. It contains calcium, iron, protein, 
and potassium. 

Buckwheat (.Kaspat - H) 

Energetics'. Astringent/hot/sweet K- VP+ 
Indications'. It is not as nutritious as wheat, but is 
still considered helpful as a food. It is too heating 
and drying for Pitta and Vayu doshas. 

Corn (sweet) ( Yavanala) 

Energetics: Sweet/hot/sweet K- VP+ in excess 
Action: Diuretic 

Indications: Edema, kidney and gallstones, jaun¬ 
dice (corn silk especially), nutritive, liver, kidneys, 
spleen absorption, solar energy increases percep¬ 
tion (especially with ghee). 

Contraindications: Com chips, VP+ (blue com is 
colder and better for P); com bread, tortillas, posole 
V+ 


Millet {Soma; Rajika ) 

Energetics: Sweet/hot/sweet K- VP+ mildly 
Action: Demulcent, diuretic 
Indications: Nutritive, convalescence, debility, 
wholesome but difficult to digest. Millet is high in 
iron, lecithin and choline, thus preventing some 
forms of gallstones. It is full of protein and nutri¬ 
tion. It is good for colitis, ulcers, and urinary dis¬ 
orders. Due to its alkaline nature it is good for the 
spleen, pancreas, and stomach. 

Oats 

Energetics: Sweet/cold/sweetVP- K+ 

Action: Demulcent, emollient, laxative (especially 
cut or rolled) 

Indications: Calms and strengthens mind, nerves 
(especially oat straw), builds all tissues (including 
reproductive). It normalizes blood glucose in dia¬ 
betes, helps slow thyroid conditions, neutralizes 
excess cholesterol, high amounts of iron, vitamin 


E, thiamine, riboflavin, niacin, and B complex. Pro¬ 
tein is easily assimilated. 

Precautions: A little heavy and hard to digest, espe¬ 
cially with sugar and milk. May produce skin erup¬ 
tions or aggravate toxic blood conditions 

Rice ( Vrihi, Dhanya ) 

Energetics: Sweet, astringent/cold or neutral/ sweet 
VPK=, K+ in excess (especially basmati ) starch is 
easy to digest. Highly sattwic 
Action: Tonic, nutritive, demulcent, laxative 
Indications: Vomiting, anorexia, poor digestion, 
harmonizes the stomach, builds all tissues through 
plasma, soothes the nervous system and the brain. 
Helps rid the body of toxins; high in B-complex. 

Rice pointed at both ends is best. It relieves thirst 
and is good for all three doshas. White basmati 
rice is best, as it is nutritious and easily digested. 
Brown rice may have more nutrition, but since it 
is harder to digest, one may not obtain any nutri¬ 
tion from it without an excellent digestive fire. 
Contraindications: Bleached, refined white- K+, 
dma +, brown short grain (warming), maybe P+, 
V- if it can be digested 

Rye 

Energetics: Astringent/hot/pungent PK- V+ 
Action: Diuretic 

Indications: One of the best Kapha grains. Few 
allergenic reactions, very high amounts of lysine, 
helps the glands, good for weight loss. 

Wheat {Godhuma) 

Energetics: Sweet, astringent/cold/sweet VPK+ 
Action: Nutritive, aphrodisiac 
Indications: Strengthening, children’s growth, 
builds muscle tissue, energy, earth, heart, palpita¬ 
tions, calms mind, insomnia, ulcers, colitis, hem¬ 
orrhoids, heals fractures; with mi lk and sugar for 
bleeding disorders ( rakta Pitta). Taken as chapatis 
(unleavened bread pancake); wheat bran is a bulk 
laxative; used as coffee substitute. It is nourishing 
and strengthening. External poultice—astringent 
for bums, sores, s ki n rashes. 





Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 6: Nutrition 


Whole wheat restores health and alleviates Vayu. 
It is the best grain for Vayu doshas. Pasta (carbohy¬ 
drate) eaten without protein produces serotonin in 
the brain that is linked to calmness and cheerful¬ 
ness. Pasta also contains iron, phosphorous, and 
magnesium. 

Contraindications'. Gluten may cause allergies, 
aggravate arthritis, gout or other dma conditions. 
White flour is an artificial and overly refined food 
(.tamasic ), K+ dma+, clogging channels and dull¬ 
ing mind. 



Energetics'. Sweet, astringent/neutral/sweet PKV+ 
(except mung, soy) All beans are rajasic —caus¬ 
ing gas and irritating body, mind, senses and emo¬ 
tions—and therefore not recommended for yoga 
since they vitiate sattwa by aggravating the mind. 
Mung beans and tofu are the only two exceptions. 
The mung bean is the only sattwic bean. 
Indications'. Energy for strenuous work 
Element'. Earth (protein) mostly, and air; heavy and 
dry, thus hard to digest 

Combination'. As a protein they combine well with 
grains for a staple food, containing all the eight 
essential amino acids; especially split mung bean 
with long grain or Basmati rice kicharl (see rice 
section on previous page). Combine well with veg¬ 
etables. Legumes do not combine well with other 
beans, sugars, fruit or diary 
Preparation'. Well-cooked and properly spiced. 
Some need to be soaked in water overnight, espe¬ 
cially whole beans. When prepared in lard or heavy 
oils, are hard to digest, PK+ 

Seasotr. Hold their properties, so can be eaten year- 
round (because fruits and vegetables lose their en¬ 
ergies quickly, seasonal eating is suggested for them) 
though better in winter 

Antidotes'. Parboiling and removing water once or 
twice removes some irritant properties (e.g., for soy 
or kidney beans); Spices—onions, cumin, asafoe- 
tida (hing), cayenne, and salt help, but will aggra¬ 
vate Pitta 


Nutrition: Proteins, iron, B vitamins, trace miner¬ 
als; as a crop they nourish the soil instead of rob¬ 
bing it and absorb more than 100 pounds of nitro¬ 
gen from the atmosphere yearly 

Bean List 
Aduki 

Energetics: Sweet, astringent/cold/pungent PKV+ 
slightly rajasic 

Action: Alterative, diuretic, heart tonic 
Indications: Heart, blood, circulation, children, 
convalescence, edema from malnutrition, painful 
or burning urine; delayed or difficult menstruation; 
as paste with sugar for confections. 

Black Gram {Masha) 

Energetics: Sweet, astringent/cold/sweet P- V+ K+ 
mildly 

Action: Nutritive, demulcent, aphrodisiac, nervine 
tonic, lactogogue 

Indications: The most strengthening bean, diarrhea, 
dysentery, indigestion, hemorrhoids, arthritis, pa¬ 
ralysis, liver disorders, cystitis, rheumatism. In¬ 
creases semen and breast milk. Externally —plas¬ 
ter for arthritis/joint pain. 

Chick Pea/Garbanzo {Chanaka) 

Energetics: Sweet/cold/pungent PK- V+ 

Action: Nutritive, aphrodisiac, diuretic, astringent 
Indications: Strengthening, increases reproductive 
tissue, debility, brain, as humus it is easier to di¬ 
gest. Roasted—relieves gas, urine retention or ex¬ 
cess; contains calcium, iron, potassium, vitamin 
A. [Indian name: Channa dal - many varieties] 

Fava/Broad {Bakla - H) 

Energetics : Sweet, astringent/cold/sweet PKV++ 
Indications: Not used as food because some get toxic 
reactions. Contains calcium, protein, iron, B vita¬ 
mins. 

Flat Bean/Goya ( Simbi ) 

Energetics: PK- V+ 

Indications: Good for phlegm disorders 
Precautions: Not good for the eyes, depleting prop¬ 
erties 






The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Green Peas 

Energetics'. PK-V+ 

Pinto: bitter, astringent/cooling (vipaka) 
Indications : Cook well; eliminates gas and stool 
from colon 


Kidney/Navy/Pinto (Makushtaka - S; Bakla - H) 

Energetics'. PK-V+ 

Kidney: Astringent/hot/pungent 
Navy: Sweet, astringent/hot/pungent 
Pinto: Astringent/cold/pungent 
Action: Nutritive, digestive, aphrodisiac, cardiac 
Indications'. Bleeding disorders, bile, fevers, and 
other Pitta excesses. It is strengthening. Red kid¬ 
ney beans are rich in all nutrients, protein, and fi¬ 
bers. 

Contraindications'. Hard to digest 

Lentils ( Masura ) 

Energetics'. PK- V+ (in excess) 

Red: Astringent/hot/pungent 
Sweet: Sweet, astringent/cold/sweet 
Indications'. Nutritive, strengthening. High in cal¬ 
cium, magnesium, phosphorus, iron, sulfur, vitamin 
A, proteins. They reduce fat and blood, and absorb 
water. Cleanses liver, helps flu and diarrhea. 
Contraindications'. Some lentils are hard to digest; 
though easier if sprouted. (There are differing be¬ 
liefs on the use of various lentils.) They can cause 
constipation. High in uric acid - can aggravate gout. 

Lima (Cimra - Bengali) 

Energetics: Sweet, astringent/cold/sweet PKV+ 
Indications: Easier to digest, especially if fresh. 
Good for simple diarrhea (but not for Vayu, Pitta, 
or mucus diarrhea), constipation. External poul¬ 
tice—cleanses foul ulcers. Rich in potassium, min¬ 
erals, vitamins, fiber. 

Mung (Green Gram) ( Mada, Mudga) 

Energetics: Sweet, astringent/cold/sweet VPK= K+ 
in excess Sattwic 


Action'. Refrigerant, antipyretic, alterative, hemo¬ 
static. Very nutritious and wholesome 
Indications: Pitta disorders, summer food, conva¬ 
lescence from febrile or infectious disease (as 
kicharl —see Basmati rice), relieves thirst during 
fevers, febrile disease, liver, drugs, smoking, or al¬ 
cohol detoxification, cancer, enlarged liver or spleen, 
bleeding; Tea—high fevers or heat stroke. External 
paste—burns, sores, swelling, inflamed joints, draws 
out toxins, swollen breasts, mastitis, breast cancer. 
It is sometimes called mung dal”. 

Mung dal comes with green skin on or peeled and 
split in half. The latter is easier to digest. It is found 
in Indian grocery stores. 

Peanuts ( Buchanaka) 

Energetics: Sweet, astringent/hot/sweet K- VP+ 
Action: Oily and often classified as a nut 
Indications: Strengthening, protein, use raw and 
cooked (not roasted), add honey or cane sugar 
Contraindications: Dry roasted V++, peanut but¬ 
ter hard to digest K+ 

Soy/Tofu (Bhatwan - H) 

Energetics: Sweet, astringent/cold/pungent PVK+ 
Rajasic 

Tofu: Sweet, astringent/cold/pungent VP- K-+ 
Soy cheese: Sour, astringent/hot/pungent VPK+ 
Action: Easier to digest as tofu {sattwic) 
Indications: Tofu after febrile disease, as milk for 
Kapha or dma, lung infections, lymph with fever; 
taken with kicharl VPK=. Tofu is rich in protein, 
calcium and potassium. It promotes female hor¬ 
mone balance. 


Split Peas 

Energetics: Sweet, astringent/cool/sweet PKV+ 
Action: Binding stool 
Indications: Diarrhea. 

Contraindications: Hard to digest, better as soup 





Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 6: Nutrition 


Nuts & Seeds 

Energetics : Sweet/warm/sweet V- PK+ 

Actions : Tonic, nutritive, strengthening, rejuvenative 
Indications'. The best source of protein and fat from 
vegetable sources; increase fat, marrow, nerve tis¬ 
sue, reproductive tissue, ojas, build blood and 
muscles, strengthen memory and creativity; 
sattwic —helps yoga and meditation. Seeds—simi¬ 
lar yet lighter, less nourishing, easier to digest, V+ 
excess. 

Preparation: Chewed well, not taken in excess 
drinks—nut milk is best, fermented nut drinks 
(amasake) easier to digest- use with fresh ginger 
salt—better for Vayu; raw sugar—(sucanat, 
jaggery, dates, raisins) tonic, demulcent for con¬ 
valescence and debility, roasting—heavy, oily, hard 
to digest, roast in takes out oil light roasting—bet¬ 
ter for Vayu. Not roasted—better for PK but check 
that they are not rancid Nut butters are oily and 
used in small doses. 

Season: Properties are stored well. Best taken in 
fall and winter—oiliness, K+ in spring, P+ in sum¬ 
mer 

Combination: Do not combine well with beans or 
starchy vegetables (potatoes); combine well with 
dairy, most fruit, grain, sugar (though heavier and 
harder to digest) 

Antidote: Mild spices like ginger or cardamom 

Almonds ( Badama ) 

Energetics: Sweet, slightly bitter/hot/sweet VPK+ 
Actions: Nutritive, nervine, aphrodisiac, demul¬ 
cent, laxative, rejuvenation 
Indications: Cough, dry cough, increase marrow, 
semen, kidney, reproductive organs, brain, conva¬ 
lescence, debility, builds strong bones and ojas (life 
sap); good for the heart, lowers bad (LDL) choles¬ 
terol and raises good (HDL) cholesterol; cancer¬ 
fighting protease inhibitors. High in potassium, 
magnesium, phosphorus, protein, fiber, and the trace 
mineral boron (that may regulate calcium metabo¬ 
lism). 

Brazil Nuts 

Energetics: Sweet, astringent/hot/sweet; Oily, heavy 
V- P+ K++ 



Actions: Tonic strength, nutritive 

Indications: Modern research suggests they may 

improve resistance to cancer and tumors. 


Cashews ( Shoephahara ) 

Energetics: Sweet/hot/sweet- see general notes 
above VPK+ 

Actions: Expectorant 

Indications: Helps deeper tissues. High in potas¬ 
sium, magnesium, vitamin A. 


Coconut ( Dirghavraksha ) 

Energetics: Sweet/cold/sweet VP- K+ 

Actions: Refrigerant, diuretic, demulcent, emollient 
Indications: High Pitta, lungs, skin, recovery from 
febrile and infectious disease. 


Filberts ( Askhota )/ Hazelnut ( Findak - H) 

Energetics: Sweet, astringent/hot/sweet V- PK+ 
Actions: Lighter, easier for Kapha to digest 
Indications: May help restore energy in chronic 
fatigue syndrome, hypoglycemia, yeast infections. 
High in potassium, sulfur, calcium. 


Flax/Linseed ( Uma ) 

Energetics: Warming VK 
Actions: Antiinflammatory (internal & external) 
Indications: Rich in fatty acids, bronchial conges¬ 
tion, constipation. 

Contraindications: Taken with lots of liquids and 
digestive herbs 


Lotus Seeds ( Kamala - white; Padma; Kokonad - 
pink; Induvara - blue) 

Energetics: Sweet, astringent/hot/sweet P- VK+ 
ama 

Actions: Nutritive, tonic, calmative, aphrodisiac, 
rejuvenative 

Indications: With sugar and ghee —good for Vayu, 
increase deeper tissues including shukra (reproduc¬ 
tive) and ojas, nocturnal emission, leukorrhea, in- 






The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


fertility, neurasthenia; combines well with 
ashwagandha and shatdvan. 

Contraindications'. Very hard to digest 

Macadamia 

Energetics : Sweet, astringent/hot/sweet V- PK+ 
Actions'. Nutritive 

Indications: May reduce weight. N ' 
Contraindications: Oily, expensive 


Pecan 

Energetics: Sweet, astringent/hot/sweet V- PK+ 
Actions: Nutritive, aphrodisiac, laxative, nervine 
Indications: Nourishing the marrow and nerves, 
reproductive system, laxative for elderly, increases 
appetite, restores energy. High in potassium, vita¬ 
min A. 

Pinon 

Energetics: Sweet, astringent/hot/sweet Sattwic 
best of all nuts. V- PK+ (but less than other nuts) 
Actions: Nutritive, tonic, demulcent, rejuvenative 
Indications: Lungs, nerves, reproductive system, 
debility, wasting, convalescence, good as flour. 

Pistachio (Pista - H) 

Energetics: Sweet/hot/sweet V- PK+ 

Actions: Tonic, sedative 

Indications: Anemia, neurasthenia, builds muscles, 
energy, may help with alcohol recovery. They are 
rich in potassium, phosphorus, and magnesium 
salts; which when combined, help to control hy¬ 
pertension. 

Psyllium 

Energetics: Astringent/cold/pungent VPK= 
Actions: Antiinflammatory for digestive tract, laxa¬ 
tive; may cause gas initially 
Indications: Constipation, hardens loose stool 
Contraindications: Taken with lots of liquids and 
digestive herbs. 

Pumpkin Seeds ( Punyalatha, Dadhiphala ) 

Energetics: Sweet/hot/pungent PK- (light quality) 
V + excess 

Actions: Antiparasitical 


Indications: Parasites including tapeworm and 
roundworm; gout. 

Contraindications: Reduces shukra 

Sesame Seeds (Tila) 

Energetics: Sweet, bitter astringent/hot/pungent V- 
PK+ 

Actions: Nutritive, tonic, rejuvenative 
Indications: Nourish all tissues, internal organs, and 
skin; growth of teeth, bones, and hair; debility, con¬ 
valescence. Black—best for tonic, oil or butter; best 
used for nourishing effects; white seeds go rancid 
quickly. Build immunity and life sap ( ojas ); sesame 
seed milk relieves colitis, gastritis, heartburn, and 
indigestion. 

Sunflower Seeds ( Arkakantha , Suria-mukhi ) 

Energetics: Sweet, astringent/cold/sweet VPK= 
Indications: Febrile or infectious disease, cleanse 
lungs and lymph. 


m 


Walnuts ( Akshota ) 

Energetics: Sweet/hot/sweet V- PK+ 

Actions: Nutritive, aphrodisiac, laxative, nervine; 
unripe fruit and husk—antiparasitical 
Indications: Marrow, calms the nerves, reproduc¬ 
tive tissues, laxative for elderly, useful for para¬ 
sites, ringworm (internal and external use), s ki n 
conditions. Leaves are used as a wash for malig¬ 
nant sores, and leukorrhea. High in potassium, 
magnesium, vitamin A, reduces serum cholesterol. 



Dairy 

Dairy is most beneficial when raw, from animals 
that are treated kindly (i.e., free roaming), and who 
receive no steroid injections or chemicals in their 
foods. 

Energetics: Sweet/cool/sweet VP- K+ Sattwic 
Tissues: Builds all seven tissues ( sapta dhatus )— 
especially increase plasma, fat, reproductive 
Indications: Calms the mind, nerves, and emotions. 
It is good for meditation and yoga; emaciation, de¬ 
bility, convalescence, wasting, bleeding, sexual 
debility. 


. fg "Sfc 







Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 6: Nutrition 


Contraindications'. Heavy, damp, sticky; increases 
mucus and dma. Raw and organic dairy products 
from healthy, happy cows are best (pasteurized and 
homogenized dairy products are more tamasic) 
Preparations'. Warm or room temperature, boiled 
milk. Refrigerated (i.e., cold) dairy increases cima. 
Milk is better raw and organic, after being boiled 
for one minute, and then cooled. 

Combinations'. Dairy does not combine well with 
other foods (or salt). Having milk first thing in the 
morning is better before other foods are eaten. It is 
incompatible with meat, fish, yeast bread (which 
ferment the dairy), sour fruit (which makes the 
dairy curdle), fruit, nuts, pickles, pickled veg¬ 
etables, and green leafy vegetables. Yogurt does 
not combine well with fruit, nuts, meat, or fish. 
Dairy does combine well with whole grains and 
raw sugars. 

Season : Sour dairy (yogurt, kefir, buttermilk, etc.) 
are not to be taken as much in the summer due to 
their heating nature (except when taken as lassi). 
Cheese in abundance, and during the winter and 
spring is not suggested (which are Kapha increas¬ 
ing times). Cheese is also not recommended dur¬ 
ing the Kapha times of the day. 

Antidotes: 

Milk—ginger, cardamom, cinnamon; yogurt and 
cheese—mustard, cayenne, cumin 


Dairy Foods 

Butter ( Navanita ) 

Energetics'. Sweet/cold/pungent VP- K+ 
Indications: Used with Pitta-reduction herbs, nour¬ 
ishing, strengthening, stabilizing, used for debil¬ 
ity and convalescence. It improves digestion, com¬ 
plexion, and is an aphrodisiac. For consumption, 
hemorrhoids, facial paralysis, bronchitis. Sug¬ 
gested for the young and old. It heals Vayu and 
Pitta concerns, blood, pulmonary TB, eye problems, 
and cough. 

Contraindications'. Heavy, fattening, clogging, in¬ 
creases cholesterol, may be artificially colored, can 
cause constipation. With salt, it increases heaviness 
and clogging. Externally—bums 



Buttermilk (Lassi, Takra) 

Energetics'. Sweet sour/cold/sweet V-PK+ (Home¬ 
made without salt. Store-bought has salt - better to 
avoid) 

Actions'. Astringent, digestive stimulant, diuretic 
Indications: Appetite, indigestion, malabsorption, 
debility, emaciation, convalescence, one of the 
easiest foods to digest. It reduces edema, hemor¬ 
rhoids, anorexia, phantom tumors, anemia, and 
nourishes the spleen. Yogurt is most easily digested 
when taken wit an equal amount of water (and 
digestive spices), and drunk with meals. For Kapha 
doshas —1/4 cup yogurt and 3/4 water. This makes 
lassi. Shake the lassi in a covered jar for 1 minute 
to produce buttermilk. In this form, takra is easier 
to digest than lassi, and is even good for srota 
blockage where lassi is not. Some believe takra 
may be taken after sunset ( lassi is not 

Cheese (Panir - H) 

Energetics: Sweet, sour/hot/sour Hard: V- PK+ (but 
still hard to digest for Vayu) Soft: VP- K+ 
Actions: Nutritive, astringent 
Indications: Diarrhea, bleeding. 
Contraindications: Constipation, congestion, mu¬ 
cus, clogs the channels, salted increases Pitta 

Cottage Cheese 

Energetics: Sour/hot/pungent VPK= 

Indications: Not too difficult to digest. 

Cream 

Energetics: Sweet/cold/sweet 
Actions: Rejuvenative, nutritive, aphrodisiac, cal¬ 
mative, laxative 

Indications: Plasma, skin, nourishes all tissues (es¬ 
pecially shukra dhatu ), lungs, stomach. It reduces 
bleeding, dry cough, dry throat, fever, thirst. Very 
similar to milk in its effects. 

Contraindications: Heavier and richer, thus, more 
mucus-forming and harder to digest. Use in small 
quantities, and avoid combining with other rich 
foods. 

Ghee (Clarified Butter) ( Ghrita ) 

Energetics: Sweet/cold/sweet VP- K+ mildly 


advised) 







The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Actions'. Tonic, emollient, rejuvenative, antacid, 
nutritive 

Indications : Fattening, increases marrow, semen, 
and ojas. Improves intelligence, vision, voice, liver, 
kidneys, and brain. The best form of fat for the 
body. The best oil for Pitta. It balances all agnis 
(digestive fires). Good for memory and digestion. 
It is used in conditions of insanity and consump¬ 
tion. Ghee promotes longevity and reproductive 
fluid, good for children and the elderly, supple body, 
lungs, herpes, injury, Vayu and Pitta disorders, fe¬ 
vers, TB, and is highly auspicious. Taken with herbs, 
it transports their nutrients and energies to all seven 
tissue layers. Ghee also reduces the desire for eat¬ 
ing animal products. When special herbs like 
ashwagandha are made into medicated ghee, they 
remove harmful cholesterol from the body. Other 
herbs are made into medicated ghees to enhance 
their healing effects. 


Ice Cream (Kulfi - H) 

Energetics: Sweet/cold/sweet P- VK+ ama+ 
Contraindications'. Not used with TB, Kapha dis¬ 
eases, ama, fever, constipation, alcoholism, chol¬ 
era. It creates cima, weakens the digestive fire, clogs 
the channels, damages the spleen, pancreas, and 
deranges the sugar and water metabolism. It causes 
hypoglycemia, diabetes, tumors. Avoid in the au¬ 
tumn and winter (better in the summer and spring) 
Ice Bean is a little better, producing less conges¬ 
tion, but still not very healthful Frozen Yogurt is 
also not much better. The less sugar content, the 
better. Cold dairy and sugar together are not very 
healthy for the body and mind. [Indian kulfi is made 
with whole milk, without whip¬ 
ping air into it.] 

Kefir 

Energetics', sour/hot/sour V- PK+ 

Actions: Fighter than yogurt, 
heavier than buttermilk 
Indications'. Improves digestion 
and absorption, low appetite, re¬ 
lieves anorexia. Fruit-sweetened is not as good. 



Milk ( Dugdha, Kshira ) 

Energetics: Sweet/cold/sweet VP- K+ Highly 
sattwic. It is invigorating, increasing the dhcitus. 
Actions: May be taken in larger quantities than other 
dairy. It is a tonic, rejuvenative, nutritive, aphrodi¬ 
siac, calmative, laxative 

Indications: Nourishes plasma, skin, all tissues (es¬ 
pecially shukra dhcitu). It is a tonic for the lungs 
and stomach (reduces bleeding from these sites). 
Milk calms dry cough and dry throat, fever, and 
thirst. It is a mild laxative with ghee. For Pitta con¬ 
ditions. It is excellent for the children and the eld¬ 
erly, debilitation, convalescence, nourishing the 
brain, nerves, mind, and memory. Boiled milk 
builds ojas , promotes sleep (with warm nervine 
herbs). Boiled, it reduces Vayu and Kapha. It pro¬ 
duces semen. 

Cows: Promotes longevity and rejuvenation. It 
helps strengthen emaciation after injury, increases 
intelligence, strength, and breast milk. It is a natu¬ 
ral laxative, relieves exhaustion, dizziness, toxins, 
difficult breathing, cough, severe thirst and hun¬ 
ger; chronic fevers, urinary, and bleeding disor¬ 
ders. It promotes auspiciousness. Cows’ milk is 
said to be the best of the milks. 

Goats: Easily digested and heals pulmonary TB, 
fevers, difficult breathing, bleeding disorders and 
diarrhea. 

Contraindications: It is damp and can weaken agni. 
It generally contains residues of inorganic fertiliz¬ 
ers, antibiotics, steroids; and is homogenized and 
pasteurized; and comes from mistreated cows. 
Thus, inorganic milk may cause side effects. Dairy 
allergies may be due to these inorganic substances. 
However, allergies may also be caused by its heavy 
nature. Do not take milk at night, unless it being 
used as a laxative or calmative. Then boil and use 
the appropriate herbs and oils. May cause colds or 
rheumatism. Goats Milk has a warm energy K- VP+. 
Antidotes: To remove the heavy nature of milk, di¬ 
gestive herbs such as ginger and cinnamon are sug¬ 
gested. This may alleviate allergies. 

AM—aphrodisiac 

Noon—KP-; digestive stimulant 

PM—for children, calmative, laxative 

Surface milk is good for all three doshas The foam 

is good for all three doshas 










Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 6: Nutrition 


Sour Cream 

Energetics'. Sour/hot/pungent V- PK+ 

Actions'. Stimulant, nutritive 
Contraindications'. In excess it may cause acidity 

Yogurt ( Dadhi ) 

Energetics'. Sweet, sour/cold/sweet Sweet yogurt 
VP- K+. Sour yogurt V- PK ama + Very sour yo¬ 
gurt causes bleeding disorders. Sweet and sour 
yogurt has mixed effects 

Actions'. Nutritive, digestive stimulant, astringent 
Indications'. Nourishes all tissues. In small 
amounts, it aids digestion of all other foods. It re¬ 
plenishes positive flora, decreases vaginal yeast 
infections and cancer; malignant tumors, boosts 
the immune system, promotes strength relieves 
the flu, colds, anorexia, emaciation, and diarrhea 
(take with appropriate spices); uric acid, digestive- 
tract infections, cholesterol, cholera. Yogurt, l ik e 
milk, is considered sacred ( sattwic). [See butter¬ 
milk]. Yogurt adds weight and fat; and improves 
digestion when taken during meals. The whey re¬ 
duces anorexia, weakness, emaciation, malabsorp¬ 
tion. Whey cleanses the naclls, increases appetite, 
and reduces mental fatigue. Yogurt made by hand, 
mixed with pepper and cane sugar strengthens the 
body. 

Contraindications'. Heavy, in excess it causes con¬ 
stipation, clogs srotas, aggravates toxic blood (i.e., 
acne, skin rashes). Do not take after sunset. Yogurt 
or lassi is not to be taken with diseases involving 
blocked channels ( srotas ) 

Antidote : Take with ghee, dmalakl and water 


Take care of the Earth , 
it was not left to us by our parents, 
it was loaned to us by our children. 

Kenyan proverb 


Animal Products 

Meat & Fish 

Energetics'. Sweet/warm/sweet V- PK+ tamasic 
Indications'. Meat is the most nourishing food, ex¬ 
cellent for debility, convalescence, lowering high 
Vayu 

Contraindications'. Most potentially deranging food, 
breeds toxins or ama , feeds infections, fevers, tu¬ 
mors, dulls the mind and senses, reduces love and 
compassion 

Long term effects'. Creates bad karma (the higher 
evolved the animal, the worse the karma) Red meat 
of a cow is the most negative karma. Poultry yields 
less bad karma, fish even less, shellfish the least, 
eggs only very slightly. 

The Vedic texts ( shastras ) state that it is accept¬ 
able to take the life of an animal in two instances: 
if it is your job, i.e., fisherman; and if one is weak 
and it is needed to preserve or save a human life. 

Further, meat acts like a drug, inducing energy 
to get well, but it does not nourish and rebuild the 
subtler tissues 

Non-organic animal products are full of hor¬ 
mones, antibiotics, chemicals. The animals are 
often diseased and treated badly. Thus, when these 
products are eaten, the chemicals are ingested and 
affect one’s health Organs (i.e., liver) are very nour¬ 
ishing to their respective organs, but produce low 
tissue quality and dull the mind Bones and bone 
soup nourish marrow but are heavy, causing toxic 
blood 

Preparation: Cooked properly with digestive 

spices, raw or not completely cooked dma+ and 

aggravates blood Salt softens and tenderizes, MSG 

has many adverse effects 

Soups and stews are easier to tolerate 

Deep fried are more aggravating 

Canned very tamasic 

Combinations : Do not combine well with other 
foods, especially milk, bread, or potatoes. Milk is 
very toxic (mixing milk to nourish a young animal 
with flesh of one slaughtered) 

Season: Avoid in summer due to its warm energy, 
morning and evening (Kapha times), better for those 
in high altitudes or northern latitudes 






The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Antidotes : Raw vegetables, leafy greens, vegetable 
juices, bitter herbs (i.e., aloe gel) may somewhat 
antidote meat 

Beef 

Energetics : Sweet/hot/sweet V- PK+ 

Indications : Nutritious, builds blood and muscles, 
strength, endurance 

Contraindications'. Aggravates toxic blood, reduces 
compassion, dulls the mind (tamasic). 

Chicken/Turkey 

Energetics'. White—Sweet, astringent/hot/sweet 
PK- V+; Dark—Sweet/hot/sweet V- PK+ 

Actions'. Dry, light 

Indications'. Easiest meat to digest, improves ab¬ 
sorption, anorexia, debility, convalescence (espe¬ 
cially as soup). Tamasic. 

Duck 

Energetics'. Sweet, pungent/hot/sweet V- PK+ 
Actions: More nutritive 

Contraindications'. Harder to digest than turkey or 
chicken 

Lamb/Mutton 

Energetics'. Sweet/hot/sweet VPK+ 

Indications: Aphrodisiac. 

Contraindications'. Irritant, promoting sexual ac¬ 
tivity, with garlic aggravates the blood. Tamasic 

Pork 

Energetics'. Sweet/hot/sweet VPK+ 
Contraindications: Dullness, heaviness of mind 
and senses, clogs srotas (channels)—bacon, par¬ 
ticularly, is difficult to digest and is heavy because 
of high fat concentration. It increases fat tissue 
more than any other meat. Tamasic ++ 

Venison 

Energetics'. Astringent/cold/pungent V- PK+ 
Tamasic 

Actions: Nutritive, aphrodisiac 

Indications: Kidneys, bones, fertility, growth, or 

retardation in children. 


Fish 

Energetics: Sweet, salty/hot/sweetV-PK+ 
Actions: Tonic, rejuvenative, laxative, lighter than 
meat, not as dulling or grounding 
Indications: Builds plasma; oil nourishes liver, skin, 
eyes, strengthens heart, reduces cholesterol and ar¬ 
teriosclerosis. Shellfish are generally good for the 
kidneys, reproductive tissue, and impotence. They 
reduce Vayu and increase Pitta and Kapha. 
Contraindications: May cause diarrhea or nausea 
Preparation: Fresh is important; canned or salted 
aggravates humors and causes dma; steamed or 
baked is best 

Combination: Does not combine well with milk, 
sugar, meat 

Antidote: Mustard, horseradish, ginger, garlic, pe- 
rilla (shisho), sour sauces P+ aggravate blood, may 
cause diarrhea 

Ocean Fish 

Energetics: Salty/hot/sweet V- PK+ 

Freshwater Fish 

Energetics: Sweet, astringent/hot/sweet VPK= 
PK+ in excess; less salty, better for Pitta & Kapha 
Actions: Trout easiest fish to digest 

Animal Oil 

Very hard to digest, P,K, dma cholesterol, toxic 
blood 

Lard 

Energetics: Sweet/hot/sweet K, dma ++ 
Contraindications: Clogs channels, promotes obe¬ 
sity, skin diseases, gallstones 

Eggs 

En ergetics: S weet/hot/s weet White VPK=; Yolk V- 
PK+ less tamasic than meat and fish because they 
are not killed. Better yet are the unfertilized eggs. 
Still, they are considered impure karma 
Actions: tonic, nutritive, demulcent, aphrodisiac 
Indications: Vigor, fertility, convalescence, sexual 
debility 





Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 6: Nutrition 


Oils. Condiments. Spices 

Sources: Nuts, seeds, beans, oily 
vegetables and animal fats like 
milk, butter, or animal tissue 
Energetics : Sweet, bland/warm/ 
sweet V- PK+ 

Actions : Internal—demulcent, laxative 
Indications'. Maintain fat, nerve, and marrow tis¬ 
sues, allowing for easy secretion and discharge. Use: 
Cooking - adjunct and flavoring 
Massage —softens skin and muscles, dissolves tox¬ 
ins and congestion, absorbed into skin; thus lubri¬ 
cating lungs, large intestines, nourish the deeper 
dhatus. Needed by almost everyone, debility, con¬ 
valescence, snehana (oleation therapy see Chap¬ 
ter 4— Pancha karma ) 

Contraindications: Not used wit/z tuna, congestion, 
toxic blood; massage not done with red or oozing 
skin diseases; or with severe pain or palpitation — 
use light oil application to abdomen 

Almond (Badam) 

Energetics: Sweet, slightly bitter/hot/sweet VPK+ 
Action: Demulcent, expectorant, tonic, the same 
as the nut 

Indications: Cough, wasting diseases of the lungs 
and kidneys; soothes s ki n and muscles; tension, 
pain, good massage oil—absorbs well, reduces 
wrinkles and stretch marks. Builds immunity and 
life sap ( ojas ). 

Avocado 

Energetics: Sweet/cold/sweet VP- K+ 

Action: Same as fruit only more nutritive 
Indications: Strengthens muscles and liver, nour¬ 
ishes skin, good massage oil, good for salads. 

Canola 

Energetics: VK- P+ 

Indications: Lowers bad cholesterol; may lower 
blood pressure. Best oil to cook without destroying 
cholesterol-lowering properties. 

Castor Oil (Erand) 

Energetics: Sweet, bitter/hot/sweet VP- K+ in ex¬ 
cess 

Action: Purgative, antispasmodic, analgesic 


Indications: One teaspoon with a cup of warm milk 
and 1/2 teaspoon ginger before sleep is a strong rem¬ 
edy for clearing srotas and cleansing dma. Best for 
constipation (1-2 tsp. in hot water before bed.), 
used on children, epilepsy, arthritis, nerves, and 
pain. External — Best for reducing swellings. In 
packs promotes healing sores, wounds, sprains, and 
injuries. It detoxifies, reduces abdominal tumors, 
swellings, and pain, menstrual cramps. Castor is 
the best Vayu-healing oil to ingest and the best pur¬ 
gative oil, and has been dubbed, the “king of the 
oils”. An Ayurvedic analogy clarifies the role of 
castor oil. The lion is the king of the jungle. Wher¬ 
ever he goes, all other animals run away. Similarly, 
when castor oil reaches the internal body, all Vayu 
disorders run away; it is one of the major remedies 
for Vayu ailments. Taken internally, it heals enlarged 
prostate, hernia, fevers, pain and swellings of the 
waist, genitals, abdomen, and back. It is a good 
purgative (two teaspoons with warm water before 
bed). 

Coconut (Nariyal) 

Energetics: Sweet/cold/sweet VP- K+ 

Action: Tonic, emollient, refrigerant 
Indications: Specific for Pitta, nourishes and soft¬ 
ens skin, inflammatory skin, psoriasis, eczema, 
sunburn, bums, chapped lips, dry cough with fe¬ 
vers, burning in lungs, increases shukra dhatu, one 
of the easiest oils to digest. 

Corn 

Energetics: Sweet, astringent/hot/pungent KVP+ 
mildly 

Action: Demulcent, diuretic 

Indications: Difficult urination, nourishes skin. 

Flaxseed/Linseed 

Energetics: Sweet/hot/pungent VK- P+ K+ in ex¬ 
cess 

Action: Expectorant, lubricating laxative 
Indications: Cough, loosens phlegm, draws mu¬ 
cus from system. 

Margarine 

Energetics: P- V+ K+ mildly 

Action: Depends upon vegetable oil used 













The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Indications : Depends upon vegetable oil used. 

Mustard (Sarson) 

Energetics'. Pungent/hot/pungent VK- P+ 

Action : Stimulant, demulcent 
Indications'. Excellent for Kapha and Vayu disor¬ 
ders. For Kapha extemal/intemal, anticough, loos¬ 
ens lung mucus, congestion, cold, joint heaviness, 
arthritis, abdominal pain. 

Olive (Jaitoon) 

Energetics : Sweet/cold/sweetVP- K+ 

Action: Mild laxative 

Indications'. Liver, softens gallstones, bile, skin, hair, 
lowers bad cholesterol (cooking may increase cho¬ 
lesterol. Better to cook with canola.), salads, mas¬ 
sage (particularly general use or day massage since 
it is lighter in property). It may help control blood 
pressure and diabetes. Causes cellulite 

Peanut (Mungphali) 

Energetics'. Sweet/hot/sweet V- PK+ 

Action: laxative, demulcent, diuretic 
Indications'. Cooking oil, not as nutritious as 
sesame. 

Safflower 

Energetics'. Sweet, astringent/hot/pungent V- P+ 
K+ mildly 

Action'. Laxative, emmenagogue, difficult or de¬ 
layed menstruation 

Indications'. Lighter—better for Kapha, circulation, 
heart, blood, immune boosting, contains vitamin 
E. 

Sesame (Til) 

Energetics'. Sweet, bitter/hot/sweet V- PK+ highly 
sattwic 

Action: Tonic, rejuvenative, sedative, laxative, nu¬ 
tritive 

Indications'. The best oil. When used externally for 
massage it penetrates into the skin, nourishing and 
detoxifying the deepest tissue layers. Best for 
Vayu massage. It aggravates Pitta skin and eye 
conditions as it is hot in potency. It builds thin people 
and thins heavy persons; is constipating, kills para¬ 


sites, and when properly processed, it heals all dis¬ 
eases. Frying makes it unhealthy. 

Sesame aids all dhatus, lungs, kidneys, brain, 
debility, convalescence, rejuvenation, calms nerves, 
relieves muscle tension, spasms, and pain, relieves 
anxiety, tremors, insomnia, convulsions, dry cough, 
chronic constipation, voice and vision, growth of 
hair, nails, teeth, bones, children elderly, most 
deeply penetrating oil, best for Vayu, best for yogic 
diet, improves immune system and ojas\ antioxi¬ 
dant. 

Soy 

Energetics'. Astringent/cold/pungent PK- V+ 
Action: Demulcent, diuretic 
Indications: Skin, high in vitamin E. 

Sunflower (Suryamukhi) 

Energetics: Sweet, astringent/cold/sweet VPK= 
Action: Nutritive 

Indications: Skin, cough, lung heat, high in vita¬ 
min E. 


Sweeteners 

As discussed earlier, we need a certain amount of 
sweet taste to maintain tissue development. This 
is because the basic taste of our body is sweet. 
White sugars are refined, which means they have 
been stripped of their nutrition. Thus, as they are 
absorbed into the body, the body expends nutri¬ 
tion and energy to digest the sugars but gains no 
nutrition from white sugar. Absorption actually 
may not take place, turning the refined sweet to 
dma in the tissues. Raw sweets (e.g., cane sugar, 
maple syrup, etc.) contain nutrition needed for 
helping the body. Sugars relieve burning, thirst, 
vomiting, fainting, and bleeding diseases. 
Energetics: VP- K+ In excess they derange all hu¬ 
mors. Dry sugars (i.e., cookies, dry fruit, dry past¬ 
ries) derange Vayu 

Action: Tonic, demulcent, diuretic, calmative, re¬ 
frigerant, laxative, antiseptic, preservative 
Indications: Debility, rejuvenation, external— 
sores, burns, wounds, rashes, inflamed eyes, 
nirdma Pitta and nirdma Vayu; when digestive sys¬ 
tem is not clogged (if there is significant coating of 
the tongue, i.e., sdma, only fresh raw honey should 


. i r ^ 






Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 6: Nutrition 


be used). Combination : Generally, eaten alone— 
the first taste digested. Eaten after meals in large 
quantities, only sugar is digested (no foods), caus¬ 
ing gas and ama from the undigested food. It does 
not combine well with salty tastes at all. With milk, 
ghee and ginger or cinnamon—nourishing 
Antidote : Spicy sweet spices (i.e., cardamom, gin¬ 
ger, cloves, fennel) bitters are ok but do not com¬ 
bine well directly (i.e., gentian, barberry, turmeric, 
kutki, neem)—it is better to take these herbs in cap¬ 
sules before or after sweets 

Brown Sugar 

Energetics'. It is white sugar with syrup added 
Indications : Slightly less deleterious effect. 

Cane Sugar 

Energetics: Sweet/cold/sweet VP- K+ 

Laxative, hard to digest, unctuous, builds the 
body tissues, increases Kapha and urine, an aph¬ 
rodisiac. Sweet initial and post-digestive taste, 
cooling in energy. Modern cane sugars are found 
under the product names, Sucanat and Florida 
Crystals. 

Fruit Sugar 

Energetics: Sweet/cold/sweet VP- K+ 

They still derange sugar metabolism, weaken 
digestion, and promote cima in excess. Date sugar 
and grape sugar are two of the better fruit sugars. 
It is also believed that many fruit sugars are made 
from fruit from ‘third world’ countries that have 
bought the American-banned pesticides (like DDT) 
from the US and spray their fruit with these pesti¬ 
cides. So it is important to know the source of the 
fruit sugar as well. 

Honey (best sweetener) [used raw] (Madhu) 
Energetics'. Sweet/hot/ sweet VK- P+ 

Action: Demulcent, emollient, expectorant, laxative, 
nutritive, tonic, rejuvenative; external—demulcent, 
astringent, antibiotic 

Indications'. Has some of its flower properties (i.e., 
sage honey will be somewhat of a nervine, expel 
phlegm, fat, nourish mind, nerves, senses, immune 
system, ojas (royal jelly and propolis are even bet¬ 
ter for ojas), external—bums, wounds, sores, eyes. 

dr 


It is a vehicle ( anupana ) to bring herbs to the deep¬ 
est tissue layers, and make tea a tonic, expectorant, 
or laxative. 

Heals the eyes, breaks up hard masses, relieves 
Kapha, poison, hiccup, and diabetes (in small 
doses). It further heals skin conditions, parasites, 
difficult breathing, cough, diarrhea, cleanses and 
heals wounds, and aggravates Vayu. It becomes 
toxic if cooked, if used in hot weather by people 
with Pitta diseases, if cooked, if used in hot weather 
by people with Pitta diseases, or with hot foods. 
Warm raw honey is acceptable (i.e., in warm wa¬ 
ter); it promotes vomiting, and is good for decoc¬ 
tion enemas. 

Contraindications'. Heating destroys medicinal 
properties, aggravates Pitta, creates subtle toxins, 
so it is better not to cook or bake with it. Excess 
use will derange humors just like white sugar does. 
It is also a subtle toxin when taken with equal pro¬ 
portions of ghee (better to make it 1:2 or 2:1 pro¬ 
portions) which breeds toxins or cima, feeds infec¬ 
tions, fevers, tumors 

Jaggery (Guda) 

Energetics'. Sweet/hot/sweet V- PK+ Indian raw, 
natural sugar containing vitamins and minerals 
Action'. Rejuvenative, tonic 
Indications'. Difficult, painful, or burning urine, 
anemia, debility, rejuvenation. Any whole cane 
sugar such as the Sucanat and Florida Crystals 
brands of cane sugar are similar to jaggery, but are 
cooler for Pitta doshas. Well washed and stored 
(old) only slightly increases Kapha, helps elimi¬ 
nation of feces and urine. 

Lactose 

Energetics'. Milk sugar 
Action: Tonic 

Indications: Empowers herbs. 

Maltose/Malt Syrup 

Energetics: Sweet/cold/sweet 
Action: Tonic, demulcent, analgesic 
Indications: Chronic colds, lungs, stomach, abdomi¬ 
nal and intestinal spasms, colic, children, convales¬ 
cence. 





The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Maple Sugar 

Energetics : Sweet/cold/sweetVP- K+ 

Action: One of the best natural sugars; nutritive, 
demulcent 

Indications : Cough, fever, burning. 

Molasses 

Energetics'. Sweet/hot/sweet V- PK+ 

Action'. Iron, nutritive, tonic 
Indications: Builds blood, muscles, heart, debil¬ 
ity, gynecological—pregnancy, postpartum. 

Rock Candy (Mishri) 

Energetics: Made from sugar—it gives energy 
Action: Demulcent 

Indications: Cough, burning in the chest, used in 
pujas or rituals to the Deities and then eaten as 
prasad (blessed food). Better than molasses, an 
aphrodisiac, for emaciation and reducing Vayu. 
When taken with ginger in water, it relieves Pitta, 
a useful summer drink. 

White Sugar 

Energetics: Sweet/cold/sweet VPK+ 

It is artificial, overcooked, toxic, ama+, Tamasic, 
aggravates blood, feeds infections, leaches vita¬ 
mins and minerals from the body, deranges water 
metabolism, upsets sugar and fat metabolism; 
weakens liver and pancreas; hyperactivity, addic¬ 
tive. In moderation it can build tissues, though bet¬ 
ter to use whole sugars listed. 

Condiments 

Carob 

Energetics: Sweet, astringent/hot/sweet VPK= 
Sattwic 

Action: Nutritive, demulcent 

Indications: Weakness, substitute for chocolate. 

Chocolate 

Energetics: Sweet, sour/hot/sweet VPK+; rajasic 
and tamasic 

Action: Stimulant, calmative, aphrodisiac 
Indications: Depression, hypotension, as herbal tea. 
Contraindications: Usually prepared with white 
sugar so it deranges Kapha 


Mayonnaise 

Energetics: Sour, sweet/hot/sour V- PK+ 
Indications: Used on salad as a balance for Vayu. 
Contraindications: Heavy, hard to digest 

Salt ( Namak/Lavan ) 

Energetics: Salty/hot/sweet V- PK+ 

Indications: A little softens food and makes more 
digestible, aids saliva and gastric juices, gargle, 
soothe and soften mucus membranes and muscles; 
draws out toxins, relieves muscle tension; large 
amounts are used in emesis to clear stomach. 
Contraindications: Aggravates blood, excess de¬ 
ranges all humors, weakens digestion, nausea, heat, 
and heaviness; not good with heavy or moist foods 
(i.e., dairy products) Sea Salt is better than com¬ 
mercial, refined salt. Black Salt is better than sea 
salt; P+ Rock Salt is drier, lighter and a better di¬ 
gestive stimulant—better for Vayu; Tridoshic /best 
Vegetable Salts are good, they contain many min¬ 
erals 

Vinegar (Vikankar) 

Energetics: Sour/hot/sour V- PK+ (K mild) 
Action: Digestive, circulatory stimulant 
Indications: Aids secretion of hydrochloric acid, 
promotes and eases menstruation (natural forms 
like apple cider vinegar, are preferred to refined 
commercial brands. Extract alkaloids from herbs 


Milk: Is sweet in initial and post-digestive taste; cool 
in energy. VP- K+. It is invigorating, increasing the 
dhatus. 

Cows: Promotes longevity and rejuvenation. It 
helps strengthen emaciation after injury, increases 
intelligence, strength and breast milk. It is a natural 


(acetic tinctures, i.e., lobelia), other sour condi¬ 
ments, lemon or lime juice, sour pickles, perform 
similarly to vinegar. 



Liquids 

Liquids are very important to our nutrition as we 
are mainly made up of plasma. 








Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 6: Nutrition 


laxative, relieves exhaustion, dizziness, toxins, dif¬ 
ficult breathing, cough, severe thirst and hunger; 
chronic fevers, urinary and bleeding disorders. It 
promotes auspiciousness. Cows’ milk is said to be 
the best of the milks. 

Goats: Easily digested and heals pulmonary TB, 
fevers, difficult breathing, bleeding disorders, and 
diarrhea. 

Butter (fresh): Is an aphrodisiac, improves com¬ 
plexion, strength, digestion, absorbs water, heals 
Vayu and Pitta concerns, blood, pulmonary TB, 
hemorrhoids, facial paralysis, eye problems, and 
cough. 

Ghee (clarified butter): Improves intelligence, 
memory, digestion, longevity, reproductive fluid, 
eyesight; good for children and the elderly, supple 
body, pleasant voice, lungs, herpes, injury, Vayu 
and Pitta disorders, insanity, fevers, TB, and is 
highly auspicious. 

Yogurt: (made by hand and mixed with pepper 
and sugar) strengthens the body. [Mixed with wa¬ 
ter it makes Lassi, which promotes digestion when 
consumed during the meal. One-half water for 
Vayu and Pitta; 3/4 water for Kapha.] Yogurt or 
lassi is not to be taken with diseases involving 
blocked channels ( srotas ). [See the dairy section 
for further details—page 146] 

Alcohol 

Energetics'. Pungent, sweet, bitter, sour/hot/sour V- 

PK+ rajasic 

Action : Beer—diuretic 

Indications'. Small amounts of wine aid digestion 
and circulation (particularly medicated Ayurvedic 
wines, like draksha), relax nerves, promote men¬ 
struation; extracting herb properties (especially spicy 
or bitters). Beer causes kidney stones. Wine is the 
best form of light consumption. Hard liquor is very 
disruptive. Sweet liqueurs are deranging due to the 
combination of sugar and alcohol. 
Contraindications'. Excess aggravates all humors, 
aggravates blood, deranges liver, pancreas, kidneys, 
addiction, not for yoga or meditation; beer—long 
term—causes edema and overweight 


Coffee 

Energetics'. Pungent, bitter/warm/pungent KVP+ 
Rajasic 

Action'. Nervine, cardiac stimulant 

Indications'. Occasional use for energy, hypotension, 

depression. 

Contraindications'. Mild narcotic, addictive 

Fruit Juices 

Energetics'. Ama+ 

Action: Laxative 

Indications: Sour or astringent are better (cran¬ 
berry, lemon, lime, pineapple, pomegranate, Sour 
V-; astringent PK-). 

Contraindications: Weaken digestive fire, not taken 
with or directly after meals or first thing in the 
morning 

Herbal Teas 

Energetics: spicy and astringent 
Spicy- ginger, cinnamon, cloves, cardamom, or¬ 
ange peel, mint, chamomile, etc.—stimulate diges¬ 
tion VK Astringent—alfalfa, dandelion, chicory, 
strawberry leaf, hibiscus, etc.—antacid, alterative 
PK 

Milk & Dairy 

Energetics: See Dairy section (p. 135) 

Milk VP- (with sugar or honey) 

Buttermilk V 

Mineral Water 

Energetics: Carbonated PK- V+ 

Action: Oxygenates blood and cells 
Indications: Circulation, some mineral supplement¬ 
ing 

Soda 

Contraindications: Both commercial (Coke, Pepsi 
etc.) and natural are sweet and usually taken cold. 
They do not combine well with other foods, weak¬ 
ens agni, weaken spleen and pancreas, derange 
sugar and water metabolism 
Indications: Better in hot weather or when very 
thirsty. 





The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Tea 

Energetics : Bitter, sweet, astringent/cool/pungent 
PK- V + some feel it is sattwic 
Contraindications'. Refined teas may be artificial and 
damaging, excess causes insomnia, dry mouth and 
thirst, overly brewed causes constipation 
Indications: Taken with milk and spices like gin¬ 
ger and cinnamon (Indian Chai) it is less aggra¬ 
vating to Vayu. Best taken after meals, as astrin¬ 
gent tastes are digested last. Counters hyperacid¬ 
ity, summer drink, counters heat, damp, and sun 
exposure; migraine headaches, overly brewed 
causes constipation (so it is good for treating diar¬ 
rhea). 

Vegetable Juice 

Energetics: See the vegetable section 
Sour (i.e., tomato) P+, blood aggravation 
Salty V- (as soup is best) 

Green (celery, parsley, comfrey leaf) detox, PKV+ 
Carrot- cleansing, strengthening (too sweet, may 
weaken digestion) 

Wheat Grass- highly cleansing, good for dma, PK- 
, cleans blood, counters infection and tumors, V+ 
unless used with sours—lime, lemon, orange 


Water 

Energetics: Fresh spring or well is best. Tap water 
is chlorinated and devitalized; causes disease and 
dma aggravation. 

Vayu—warm or hot, better with milk or spiced due 
to its lightness 

Pitta—taken a little cool or at room temperature 

Kapha—warm or hot, not in excess 

Cold—astringent—stops bleeding, relieve burning 

sensation 

Warm—stimulant, laxative, promotes sweating, re¬ 
lieves cold sensation 

Distilled—devitalized, depletes prana, V++, drains 
toxins from system 

Excess—(especially distilled) leaches nutrients and 
dilutes plasma 

Spring—water is preferred over distilled water. 



Ayurveda suggests that liquids are best taken in 
a form other than plain water as water leeches the 
body of its minerals and nutrients. For example, 
herbal teas are preferred over plain water. 

Vayu—drink between Pitta and Kapha, sweet, 
sour, fruit, vegetable juices, and herb teas 
Pitta—more, sweet, bitter, astringent fruit or veg¬ 
etable juices, herb teas 

Kapha—drink less, bitter, astringent, diuretic, pun¬ 
gent herbal teas 

Meals—1/2 to 1 cup with meals is ok (lassi is 
recommended) to wash and clear taste buds more 
than this dilutes digestive juices 

Season—General—drink 3 to 5 cups warm (as 
tea) [summer—more; winter—less] 

Water is the great healer described in the 
Atharva Veda. It should be obtained from clean 
sources: wells, rivers, etc. Ayurveda says that our 
bodies are mostly made up of plasma. Drinking 
too much plain water will deplete the minerals and 
nutrients. Autumn and summer are the two sea¬ 
sons that are best for healthy people to drink plain 
water (and drink less plain water in the other sea¬ 
sons). Therefore, drinking teas, and fruit and veg¬ 
etable juice is advised. Some water is acceptable 
to drink at the beginning, the middle and end of 
the meal. Drinking water at the end of the meal 
will have no adverse effects on the person 

Precautions: Do not drink water with a low di¬ 
gestive fire, abdominal tumors, or enlarged abdo¬ 
men; anemia, diarrhea, hemorrhoids, duodenum 
diseases, pulmonary TB, or edema. Do not drink 
water at the beginning of the meal (causes stout¬ 
ness), or at the end of the meal (causes emaciation) 
Cold water: Relieves alcoholic intoxication, ex¬ 
haustion, fainting, vomiting, debility, giddiness, 
thirst, sun heat causing burning sensations, Pitta 
excesses, blood problems, and poisoning. 

Hot or warm water: Stimulates hunger, helps 
digestion and the throat, easily digested, cleanses 
the urinary bladder, relieves hiccup, gas, Vayu and 
Kapha imbalances. 

Boiled water: Does not overly increase the 
body’s inner moisture content. It is good for Pitta 
dosha. Do not drink boiled water kept overnight; it 
becomes stale and aggravates all three doshas. 






Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 6: Nutrition 


Coconut water: Relieves Vayu and Pitta dosha 
concerns. 

Benefits of Drinking Water 

Boiled Water : Tridoshic. It is light, a digestive 
stimulant; dispels gas, heals pain in the rib area; 
rhinitis, and hiccup. Boiled and reduced to 3/4— 
relieves Vayu; reduced to 1/2—balances Pitta. It 
is useful in early and late winter, spring, and rainy 
season. When water is boiled and reduced to 1/4 it 
relieves Kapha (but it is also constipative). It is 
helpful in the summer and fall. When water is 
cooled after boiling it heals all doshas, and is 
wholesome. Boiled water is not to be kept over¬ 
night; it becomes stale and impure. 

Hot Water: VK- Light. It stimulates digestive 
power, heals pains in the rib area; rhinitis, gas, hic¬ 
cup, and cleanses the urinary tract. Taken before 
bed, it cleanses Kapha sticking to the inner body; 
eliminates Vayu, and removes indigestion. 

Warm Water: This is not advised for exhaustion, 
mental fatigue, convulsions, hunger, and bleeding 
in the upper body areas. 

Water Digestion: Unboiled water takes three 
hours to digest. Water that is boiled and allowed 
to cool down is digested in 11/2 hours. Water that 
is boiled and drunk when warm is digested in 48 
minutes. 

Less Water Quantity: For certain diseases, it is 
advised to drink less water: anorexia, coryza, sali¬ 
vation, edema, consumption, poor digestion, ob¬ 
stinate abdominal diseases, fever, eye diseases, 
ulcers, and diabetes mellitus. 


Antidote : Counters heaviness, dispels gas, eases di¬ 
gestion 

Commercial spices'. Most supermarket spices have 
been irradiated, destroying their prana and adding 
the negative effects of radiation to the spices 
Powders: Once powdered, energies begin to dimin¬ 
ish after 6 months, although they have been found 
useful up to two years later 
Combinations: Adding them to heated ghee or oils 
empowers spices, as does a bit of honey or raw 
sugar 

Individual Spices 

Anise (Sweet Fennel) ( Shatapushpa ) 

Energetics: Pungent/hot/pungent VK- P+ 

Actions: Stimulant, carminative, lactogogue 
Indications: Similar to fennel but is more pungent 
and warm, abdominal pain, gas, indigestion, men¬ 
strual cramping, vomiting, dry cough. 

Asafoetida ( Hing) 

Energetics: Pungent/hot/pungent VK- P+ tamasic 
Actions: Stimulant, carminative, antispasmodic, 
anthelmintic 

Indications: Some consider it the best Vayu spice, 
best for relieving abdominal distention, pain, 
cramping and gas, parasites, worms, Candida, de¬ 
layed or difficult menstruation, pain, anxiety, men¬ 
tal disorders—i.e., nervousness, vertigo, anxiety, 
hysteria, worry, depression, lethargy, cough, 
asthma, arthritis, headaches, nerve pain, paralysis, 
circulation; strengthens heart; palpitations, angina, 
exorcism. 

Contraindications: Not for meditation or yoga', 
(tamasic), aggravates bile or acid conditions 
Antidote: For beans 


Spices & Herb Therapy 

Spices 

Energetics: Pungent/warm/pungent VK- P+ 
Actions: Light, dry, warm, fragrant, subtle, clear, 
stimulant, carminative, antispasmodic, diaphoretic, 
expectorant 

Indications: Spices regulate appetite and strengthen 
the agni fire, lungs, head, gastrointestinal, cleanse 
srotas, bum up dma, aid mental activity. 


Basil/Holy Basil ( tulsi ) (see Chapter 4 materia 
medica) 


Bay Leaves 

Energetics: Pungent, bitter/hot/pungent VK- P+ 
mildly 

Actions: Stimulant, carminative, analgesic 









The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Indications'. Cleansing, headaches, clear srotas, 
cough and congestion, diarrhea, hemorrhoids. Use¬ 
ful as an insect repellent in the kitchen. 

Antidote : Dairy, meat, damp sticky food 

Black Pepper ( Markka ) 

Energetics : Pungent/hot/pungent VK-P+ rajasic 
Actions: Stimulant, carminative, decongestant, 
expectorant 

Indications'. Burns up ama very well, colds, flu, 
cough, gargle for sore throat, fevers, colon cleanse, 
digests fat and obesity; metabolism, mucus, ex¬ 
pectorant, sinus congestion, cold extremities, raises 
agni, epileptic seizures, with honey, clears Kapha 
from the system in the morning. External—inflam¬ 
mations, urticaria, erysipelas. [For full details see 
Materia Medica Chapter 4 - Maricha - page 95] 

Caraway/Cumin ( Jiraka , Jira) 

Energetics'. Caraway—Sour, pungent/hot/sweet K- 
VP+ Cumin—Pungent/hot/pungent VKP= 
Actions: Stimulant, carminative, lactogogue, di¬ 
uretic (used like fennel and coriander) 
Indications: Digests bread, like fennel and dill rela¬ 
tives; colitis, gas, digestion, abdominal pain, dis¬ 
tention. 

Antidote: Overeating, heavy foods 

Cardamom (Eld) see Chapter 4 materia medica 
Antidote: Ice cream, milk, cold or sweet foods l ik e 
bananas, coffee 

Cayenne (Marichaphalam) 

Energetics: Pungent/hot/pungent VK- P+ hottest; 
most yang: rajasic 

Actions: Stimulant, expectorant, diaphoretic, hemo¬ 
static, anthelmintic 

Indications: A heart strengthened circulation, gives 
energy after shock, heart attack or collapse; stops 
acute bleeding; absorption, chill, abdominal disten¬ 
tion, worms, colds, flu, sinus congestion, cleanses 
colon, helps digest fats, burns ama. 

Antidote: For raw food 

Precautions: Very damaging to mucus membranes. 
Not an advised spice. 


Chamomile (Babunike-phul - H) 

Energetics: Pungent, bitter/cold/pungent PK- V+ in 
excess; sattwic 

Actions: Stimulant, antispasmodic, emmenagogue, 
emetic, diaphoretic, carminative analgesic, 
nervine, calmative 

Indications: Pain, headaches; abdominal, children 
—nerves and digestion; colic, bile, blood, men¬ 
strual, ear, neuralgia, and injury pains; external use 
also; calms nervousness, anxiety, hysteria, insom¬ 
nia, neurasthenia; poor digestion related to ema¬ 
ciation and nervousness. 

Cinnamon ( Thwak ) 

see page 107 

Cloves (Lavangaha) 

Energetics: Pungent/hot/pungent; rajasic 
K- P+ V+ in excess 

Actions: Stimulant, expectorant, decongestant, 
anthelmintic, analgesic, aphrodisiac Indications: 
Gas, nausea, vomiting, toothache, hiccup, laryn¬ 
gitis, pharyngitis, headache, clears head, sinus and 
lungs, nerves, toothache, colds, cough, asthma, 
warms and disinfects the lymphatics, low blood 
pressure, impotence, indigestion, opens and clears 
srotas. 

Precaution: Promotes sexual activity 
Antidote: Sugars 

Coriander (Dhyanaka) (For full details see Mate¬ 
ria Medica Chapter 4 - Dhdnyak - page 83) 
Antidote: Hot foods and spices (i.e., as cilantro - 
coriander leaf) 

Cumin (see caraway) 

Dill (Misroya) 

Energetics: Sweet, astringent/hot/sweet VPK= 

leaves cooler, seeds warmer 

Actions: Stimulant, antispasmodic, lactogogue 





Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 6: Nutrition 


Indications'. Colic, cramps, and diarrhea for chil¬ 
dren; similar to fennel. 

Fennel ( Methica, Sonph ) 

Energetics'. Sweet/cold/sweet VPK= perhaps the 
most sattwic spice 

Actions: Stimulant, diuretic, carminative, sto¬ 
machic, antispasmodic, lactogogue 
Indications: Abdominal pain (gas or indigestion), 
menstrual cramps, hernia, diarrhea, colic, vomit¬ 
ing, morning sickness, nausea, anorexia, cough, 
dry cough, promotes semen, increases vision, raises 
agni, difficult or burning urination, digestion— 
children and elderly; promotes menstruation, nurs¬ 
ing mothers—increases breast milk flow. 

Fenugreek (Medhika, Methi) 

Energetics: Pungent/hot/pungent VK- P+ 

Actions: Demulcent, diuretic, tonic, rejuvenative, 
aphrodisiac, stimulant, antirheumatic Indications: 
Longevity, nerves, allergies, arthritis, skin, reju¬ 
venation, diabetes, allergies, bronchitis, flu, chronic 
cough, dysentery, dyspepsia, convalescence, 
edema, toothache, sciatica, neurasthenia, counters 
cold (i.e., extremities, abdominal pain, indigestion, 
respiratory and reproductive systems, hair growth, 
promotes breast milk flow, liver hypo-function, 
seminal debility, debility, outdoor winter work). 
Do not use when pregnant. 

Garlic see Chapter 4 materia medica 

Ginger see Chapter 4 materia medica 

Horseradish ( Sobhanjana, Sirgu ) 

Energetics: Pungent, astringent/hot/pungent VKP+ 
like mustard 

Actions: Stimulant, expectorant, diuretic, antispas¬ 
modic, antilithic (dissolves stones) 

Indications: Cleanses lungs, diabetes, sinuses, colds, 
flu, sore throat, hoarseness, digestion, circulation, 
rheumatism. External poultice for facial neuralgia, 
inflammatory swellings). 


Antidotes: Fish and raw vegetables 

Marjoram (Sathra - H) 

Energetics: Pungent, astringent/hot/pungent VKP+ 
Actions: Stimulant, diaphoretic, expectorant 
Indications: Colds, flu, weak digestion, promotes 
menstruation. 


Mustard ( Rajika- Brown; Sarshapah - Black) 

Energetics: Bitter (brown) Pungent/hot/pungent 
VK- P+; best Kapha spice 
Actions: Stimulant, analgesic, expectorant 
Indications: Laxative, 1 teaspoon ingested as an 
emetic for drunkenness, poisons. Clears head and 
sinuses, chronic colds and coughs. Hot mustard 
bath—as an emmenagogue. Ten-minute external 
paste—chest troubles, blisters, inflammatory nerve 
disorders, pain and swelling of the joints, edema, 
headache, abdominal colic and pain, obstinate 
vomiting; gout, sciatica, urticaria, arthritis. 

Nutmeg {Malathi-phalam-, Jati-phalam) 

Energetics: Sweet, pungent, astringent/hot/pungent 
VKP= best sedative of all spices; tamasic 
Actions: Stimulant, carminative, astringent; use for 
abdominal pain, dysmenorrhea, insomnia, poor 
absorption (especially in the small intestine), ab¬ 
dominal distention, incontinence, diarrhea, dysen¬ 
tery, impotence, mental disorders (i.e., nervous¬ 
ness, anxiety, hysteria—prepared in milk decoc¬ 
tion) 

Oregano 

Energetics: Sour, astringent/hot/pungent VKP+ 
Actions: Stimulant, diaphoretic, carminative, anal¬ 
gesic, antiseptic 

Indications: Colds, cough, nausea, morning sick¬ 
ness, dysmenorrhea, gas, indigestion. Excellent for 
severe distention. 


Peppermint {Paparaminta - H) 

Energetics: Sweet/cold/pungent VPK= 





The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Actions'. Stimulant, diaphoretic, carminative, anal¬ 
gesic 

Indications'. Colds and flu, fevers, and sore throat; 
clears head, sinuses, allergic headaches, and hay 
fever; opens mind and senses; promotes emotional 
harmony. 

Poppy Seeds (Kasa bijam) 

Energetics : Sweet, astringent/hot/pungent VKP+ 
Actions: Stimulant, anti spasmodic, astringent 
Indications'. Diarrhea, malabsorption, cramping 
pain, cough, aids digestion. 

Rosemary 

Energetics: Pungent, bitter/hot/pungent VK- P+ 
mildly 

Actions: Stimulant, diaphoretic, excellent emme- 
nagogue 

Indications: Eases menstruation, headaches, har¬ 
monizes and strengthens heart and emotions. 

Saffron see Chapter 4 materia medica 

Sage ( Salbia-sefakuss - H) 

Energetics: Pungent, astringent/hot/pungent VK- P+ 
in excess 

Actions: Stimulant, diuretic, nervine, astringent 
Indications: Opens the lungs, head, sinuses; sore 
throat; clears srotas, voice, perception, thought; 
relieves excessive sexual desire, calms heart, di¬ 
gests meat and dairy, reduces excess secretions in 
body (i.e., stops the flow of milk in nursing women, 
swollen lymph glands, dries excess mucus in lungs 
and nose, dries sores, ulcers, and bleeding; and 
night sweats), is a diuretic for urinary tract prob¬ 
lems, calms the brain. 

Spearmint (Pahadipudina - H) 

Energetics: Sweet/cold/pungent VPK= 

Actions: Stimulant, diaphoretic, diuretic, calmative 


Indications: Painful, difficult or burning urine (cold), 
colic, indigestion, and sleep in children, nausea, 
vomiting, morning sickness. 

Thyme (Ipar - H) 

Energetics: Pungent/hot/pungent VK- P+ 

Actions: Stimulant, diaphoretic, anticough, anthel¬ 
mintic, antiseptic 

Indications: Severe cough, whooping cough, bad 
breath, indigestion, gas, menstrual disorders. 

Turmeric see Chapter 4 materia medica 

Vitamins 

Under normal conditions, Ayurveda suggests 
persons receive their vitamins through herbs and 
foods because they are easier to digest and absorb 
in these simple or elemental forms. Each dosha 
requires a few vitamins that may naturally become 
depleted more rapidly than the rest. If vitamin pills 
or liquids are taken, it is suggested coriander or 
cardamom be taken with them to help digest and 
absorb the vitamins and minerals. Pitta doshas have 
the strongest digestive system, and can better uti¬ 
lize supplements without weakening their diges¬ 
tive fire. Kapha doshas need the least amount of 
supplements, and more hot spices to raise their 
digestive fire. Further, oily vitamins (e.g., E, D, A) 
are not advised due to their tendency to dampen 
digestion. 

Dosha Vitamins Minerals 

Vayu A, B3, D, E, C zinc, calcium 
Pitta A, B, K calcium, iron 
Kapha B6, D none needed 


Dosha 

Vitamins 

Minerals 

Vayu 

A, B3, D, E, C 

zinc, calcium 

Pitta 

A, B, K 

calcium, iron 

Kapha 

B6, D 

none needed 











Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 6: Nutrition 


Vitamins 

Symptoms of Vitamin Deficiency 

A 

dry, rough, scaly, itchy skin; wrinkles, pimples, premature 
aging, dandruff, split nails, night blindness, burning, 
itching eyes; thickening cornea 

Bl* 

poor memory and digestion, fatigue, edema, ear 
problems, irritability, heart failure 

B2* 

itching, burning, bloodshot eyes; light sensitivity, hair loss 

liver disorders 

B3* 

poor memory, circulation and metabolism; fatigue, 

cholesterol 

B5* 

infections, poor digestion, nerve and heart disorders, hay 

fever, hair loss 

B6* 

poor digestion, hormone imbalance, eczema, anemia, 
water retention, PMS, dandruff 

B9* 

anemia, G.I. disorders, hair loss 

B12 

premature aging, fatigue, insomnia, poor 
memory/concentration; central nervous system disorders 

C 

bleeding gums, heavy metal poisoning, adrenal weakness, 

cellulite 

D 

weak teeth, nails, bones, hair 

E 

muscle/nerve weakness, weak adrenals, dry skin 

F 

heart disorders, cholesterol, female disorders, skin 
disorders, yeast infections, hypertension, cystic fibrosis, 
liver disorders, malformed tissues, intestinal disorders 

K 

low energy, premature aging, bleeding 


*B1- Thiamine, B2- Riboflavin, B3- Niacin, B5- Pathothenic Acid. B6- Pyroxidine, B9- Folic Acid 




















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Vitamins 

Food Sources 

A 

dark green or yellow vegetables, com, soy, lentils, 
garbanzo beans, whole milk 

B1 

rice bran, whole grains, molasses, green vegetables, 
beans, soy flour, nuts 

B2 

millet, com, soy, whole wheat, rye, wheat, germ, 
beans, milk, avocado, nuts, molasses, dark greens 

B3 

wheat, buckwheat, barley, wild rice, black beans, 
sesame seeds, nuts, dark greens, milk 

B5 

whole grains, com, beans, broccoli, cabbage, 
cauliflower 

B6 

brown rice, buckwheat, beans, carrots 

B9 

whole grains, salad, green vegetables, wheat germ, 
bran, sprouted grains, soy products, yogurt 

B12 

asparagus, alfalfa sprouts, cabbage family, potatoes, 
mustard greens, peas, okra, green peppers, mung 
beans, tomatoes, berries, citrus fruits, melons, 
mangoes, papayas, pineapple, dairy, cimalakl 

C 

whole grains, milk 

D 

sunlight, flax oil, whole grains, dark greens, butter 

E 

wheat germ, whole grains, dark greens, nuts, seeds, 
butter, milk, molasses 

F 

vegetable oils, linseed oil, olive oil, flaxseed oil, soy 
oil, safflower oil, seeds 

K 

yogurt, eggs, molasses, milk 




















Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 6: Nutrition 


Minerals 

Symptoms of Mineral Deficiency 

Biotin 

anemia, depression, poor metabolism, balding, adrenal/testosterone 
disorders, dermatitis, balding 

Choline 

fat, low immunity, weak nerves, premature graying 

Inositol 

eczema, hair loss, cholesterol, constipation 

PABA 

nervousness, fatigue, indigestion, premature graying, vitiligo 

Bioflavonoids 

varicose veins, bleeding gums, eczema 

Calcium 

weak hair, teeth, nails; PMS, insomnia, white nail spots, leg cramps 

Chromium 

arteriosclerosis, hypoglycemia, memory loss, fatigue, slowed 
growth, muscle growth 

Chloride 

pernicious vomiting 

Copper 

loss of hair color, poor skin tone 

Iodine 

thyroid disorders, dry skin, cold 

Iron 

anemia, low vitality, brittle hair, weak nails, frequent infections, 

itchy skin, short breath 

Magnesium 

low vitality, tense muscles, psoriasis 

Manganese 

diabetes, brain weakness, knee problems 

Molybdenum 

decreased growth, food consumption 

Phosphorus 

bone loss, muscle weakness, fatigue 

Potassium 

depression, arrhythmia, indigestion, dry skin 

Selenium 

premature aging, dandruff, skin elasticity loss 

Silica 

flabbiness, weak nails 

Sodium 

anorexia, weak muscles, nausea 

Sulfur 

eczema, weak nails, scaly skin 

Zinc 

white nail spots, night blindness, colds/infections, hair loss, loss of 

taste and smell 




























The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Minerals in Foods 

Minerals 

Foods 

Biotin 

whole grains, nuts, legumes, cauliflower 

Choline 

lecithin (in whole grains, nuts, soybeans) 

Inositol 

molasses, brown rice, barley, oats, legumes, seeds 

PABA 

brown rice, wheat germ, molasses 

Bioflavonoids 

the same herbs as vitamin C 

Calcium 

sea or dark greens, seeds, milk, nuts, dried fruit, yogurt, carob, 
asparagus, broccoli, tofu, oats 

Chromium 

whole grains, corn oil, potatoes 

Chloride 

salt 

Copper 

kelp, legumes, grains, avocados, raisins, oats, nuts 

Iodine 

kelp, beans, carrots, tomatoes, pineapple 

Iron 

leafy greens, parsley, dulse, whole grains, potatoes, fruit, raisins, seeds, 

nuts, milk 

Magnesium 

whole grains, yellow corn, soy, nuts, lentils, dried fmits, sea and leafy 
greens, apples, celery, citrus, dairy, oats, cornmeal, rice, apricots 

Manganese 

whole grains, green and sea vegetables, nuts, seeds, avocados, 

blueberries 

Molybdenum 

legumes, whole grains, leafy greens 

Phosphoms 

whole grains, beans, nuts, dairy, all vegetables, sesame seeds, 
sunflower/pumpkin seeds 

Potassium 

bananas, watercress, all vegetables, dried fmit, oranges, grains, 
sunflower seeds, dairy, legumes 

Selenium 

whole grains, beans, tomatoes, broccoli 

Silica 

horsetail (herb) 

Sodium 

salt 

Sulfur 

nuts, cabbage family, apples, cranberries, beans 

Zinc 

pumpkin/sunflower seeds, grains, soy, vegetables 





























Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 6: Nutrition 


Menus 

Below are sample menus for various health con¬ 
cerns, as well as daily meals for various doshas. 


Vayu Dosha 
Vayu (eat every 3 - 4 hours) 



Spring/Summer 

Winter/Fall 

Waking 
(1/2 hour 
before 
meal) 

herb tea 
(cardamom, 
ashwagandha, 
triphala ) 

hot milk with 
ghee, fresh ginger, 
turmeric, honey 
chyavan prash 

Breakfast 

Cream of rice 
with ghee, 
cardamom, and 
cane sugar; half 
cup boiled mild 
with cinnamon 
and cane sugar 

Oatmeal or Cream 

of Wheat with 
ghee, cardamom, 
and maple syrup 

Snack 

sweet fruit or 
cane sugar sweet 
with cardamom 

almond butter on 
chapatis with 
cardamom and 
ghee', herb tea 

Lunch 

white basmati 
rice, split yellow 
mung dal, ghee, 
sweet potato, 
lassi 

same; add whole 
wheat chapatis 

Snack 

sesame seed 
butter, fennel, 
and ghee on 
chapati 

baked apple with 
cinnamon and 
honey; herb tea 

Dinner 

artichoke pasta, 
ghee, squash, 
cardamom, lassi 

barley/garbanzo 
soup, ghee, 
cabbage, lassi, 
cardamom 

Snack 

hot ginger, 
licorice tea with 
honey and ghee 

boiled milk, ghee, 
fresh ginger, 
honey 


Vayu Arthritis 

Serves: 4-5 people 
Preparation: 30 minutes 
V, P-; K +* 

1/2 cup white basmati rice 
1/2 cup split yellow mungdal 
3 medium zucchinis 1 tsp. cardamom 
1 tsp. bald 1 tsp. tulsi 
1 tsp. turmeric 1 tsp. guggul 
5 tsp. ghee 2 cups water 

Wash the rice and dal in water and place in a pot 
with 2 cups of water; heat until it boils. Reduce the 
flame to a slow boil and cook for 10 minutes (add 
more water if needed). 

Add a little water in another pot and place a 
steamer inside. Slice the zucchini, putting the slices 
in the steamer and boil for 2 to 3 minutes. When 
the food is ready, put the ghee in a frying pan and 
turn the heat to high. Put a drop of water in the 
pan. When it sizzles, lower the flame and add the 
rest of the spices and stir until the aroma of the 
herbs is released. Add the rice and dal to the mix¬ 
ture in the frying pan and stir. 

[For a Pitta- or Kapha-reducing meal, replace 
zucchini with celery. Add 1/4 tsp. neem to the 
herbal ingredients] 



















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Pitta Doshas 



Spring/Summer 

Winter/Fall 

Waking 

herb tea 
(s hatdvari, 
turmeric, fennel) 
with ghee, cane 
sugar 

hot milk 
with ghee, 
turmeric, 
chyavan 
prdsh 

Breakfast 

puffed rice or 
wheat with ghee, 
coriander, 
coconut milk 

Cream of 
Wheat or 
barley with 
ghee, 
coriander, 
soy milk 

Snack 

sweet or bitter 
fruit 

apple or pear 

Lunch 

white basmati 
rice, split yellow 
mung dal, ghee, 
broccoli, 
coriander, lassi, 
salad 

same; add 
whole wheat 
chapatis 

Snack 

sunflower seeds; 
fennel; 

lemongrass tea 

milk burfi\ 
mint tea 

Dinner 

artichoke pasta, 
ghee, 

cauliflower, 
cilantro, lassi 

barley/garba- 
nzo soup, 
ghee, 
cabbage, 
lassi, 

cardamom 

Snack 

coconut 

macaroon 

pumpkin pie, 
herb tea 


Liver, Spleen, Gall Bladder Disorders 

Serves: 4-5 people 
Preparation: 30 minutes 

V +, P, K - 

1/2 cup basmati rice 1/2 cup lima beans 
2 cups fresh corn 2 cups green beans 
2 1/2 cups mung bean sprouts 
1 tsp. turmeric 1 bunch cilantro 

1 tsp. manjishtha 1 tsp. gokshura 

2 cups water 1 tsp. bhumldmalaki 
5 tsp. ghee 1 bunch dandelion root 

Wash the rice and lima beans in water and place 
in a pot with 2 cups of water; heat until it boils. 
Reduce the flame to a slow boil and cook for 10 
minutes (add more water if needed). 

Put a little water in another pot and place a 
steamer inside. Place the corn and green beans in 
the steamer and boil for 2 to 3 minutes. 

When the food is ready, put the ghee in a frying 
pan and turn the heat to high. Put a drop of water 
in the pan. When it sizzles, lower the flame and 
add the spices, stirring until the aroma of the herbs 
is released. Add the rice and dal to the mixture in 
the frying pan and stir for 15 to 30 seconds. Add a 
mung bean sprout salad to the meal. 

[Excellent for recovering 
from alcohol addictions] 

Heart Disorders 

Serves: 4-5 people 
Preparation: 30 minutes 

V +, P, K - 

1/2 cup whole wheat 1/2 cup aduki beans* 

11/2 eggplants 1 bunch cilantro 
1/4 tsp. turmeric 1/4 tsp. arjuna 
1/4 tsp. guggul 5 tsp. ghee 

3 cups water 

tomato/cucumber/lettuce salad 


Soak aduki beans and wheat overnight. Wash 
and peel eggplant and cut into slices. Pour salt on 
both sides of the eggplant and let it sit on a paper 
towel for about 1/2 hour. This draws out the alka¬ 
loid properties (which may cause allergies). Then 
cut the eggplant into pieces. 


.&r ^ 
















Section 3: Therapeutics 


Kapha Doshas 

Chapter 6: Nutrition 


Wash the wheat and lima beans in water and 
place in a pot with 2 cups of water, heat until it 
boils. Reduce the flame to a slow boil and cook 
for 10 to 20 minutes (until soft). Add more water 
to the pot if needed. 

Add a little water in another pot and place a 
steamer inside. Place the eggplant slices in the 
steamer and boil for 2 to 3 minutes. When the food 
is ready, put the ghee in a frying pan and turn the 
heat to high. Put a drop of water in the pan. When 
it sizzles, reduce the flame to low and add the spices, 
stirring until the aroma of the herbs is released. Add 
the wheat or beans to the mixture in the frying pan 
and stir for 15 to 30 seconds. Add cilantro on top of 
the meal, and lettuce, tomato, cucumber salad on 
the side. 

[For Vayu heart disease, replace 
aduki beans with mung beans] 




Kapha Doshas 



Summer/Spring 

Winter/Fall 

Breakfast 
(not required) 

ginger/licorice tea 

chyavan prash, 
coffee with goats 
milk 

Snack 

(not advised) 

cranberries 

stewed apricots 

Lunch 

barley, split 
yellow mungdal, 
ghee, celery, 
coriander, lassi 

buckwheat 
chapatis, lima 
beans, brussels 
sprouts, ghee, 
pepper, mint tea 

Snack 

(not advised) 

raspberries; 
lemongrass tea 

pumpkin seeds, 
saffron tea with 
honey 

Dinner 

artichoke pasta, 
ghee, burdock, 
cardamom, lassi 

rye soup, 
garbanzo beans, 
beets, cardamom, 
cinnamon tea 

Snack 

(not advised) 

cranberries 

macintosh apple, 
chamomile tea 


Kapha Diabetes 

Serves: 4 people 
Preparation: 30 minutes 
V, K -, P + (moderately) 

1/2 cup barley 1/2 cup mungdal 
1/2 eggplant 1 bitter gourd ( karela ) 

1 tsp. guggul 1 tsp. turmeric 

1 tsp. cardamom 1 tsp. mustard seeds 

2 cups water mango chutney 

3 tsp. ghee , mustard or canola oil 

1 tsp. gudmar (if there is pancreatic damage) 

Wash and peel eggplant and cut into slices. Pour 
salt on both sides of the eggplant and let it sit on a 
paper towel for about 1/2 hour. This draws out the 
alkaloid properties (which may cause allergies). 
Wash the bitter gourd and cut the gourd and egg¬ 
plant into pieces. 

Wash the barley and dal in water. Place the bar¬ 
ley and mungdal in a pot with 2 cups of water and 
heat until it boils. Reduce the flame to a slow boil 
and cook for 10 minutes (add more water if 
needed). 



















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Food 

Antidotes For Indigestion 

Food 

Antidotes For Indigestion 

Alcohol 

chew cardamom or cumin seeds 

Lassi 

black pepper, cumin, salt 

Almonds 

soak in water overnight and peel 
the skin. Take with cane sugar 

Legumes 

black pepper; cumin; salt 

Apples 

cinnamon 

Marijuana 

calamus, milk, ghee 

Avocado 

turmeric, lemon, black pepper 

Meat (red) 

cayenne; cloves, chili peppers 

Bananas 

dry ginger; raw honey and 
cardamom 

Milk 

cane sugar 

Butter 

raw honey; cane sugar 

Mung Beans 

lemon 

Cabbage 

cook in sunflower oil, turmeric, 
and mustard seeds 

Nuts 

soak overnight 

Caffeine 

nutmeg and cardamom 

Oats 

turmeric; mustard seeds; cumin 

Cauliflower 

ginger 

Oil 

lemon 

Cheese 

black pepper; chili pepper; 
cayenne 

Onions 

well cooked 

Chick peas 
(garbanzo or 
channadal ) 

ajwan seeds 

Popcorn 

ghee 

Chocolate 

cardamom; cumin 

Potatoes 

warm water with ajwan seeds 

Cucumber 

ajwan seeds; salt 

Radish 

salt 

Eggs 

parsley, cilantro, turmeric, onions 

Red Pepper 

ghee 

Fish 

coconut, lime, and lemon 

Rice 

salt or black pepper 

Garlic 

olive oil with lemon juice 

Sugar 

lemon 

Ghee 

grated coconut and lemon 

Tobacco 

brahmi, vachd root, ajwan seeds 

Green Beans 

ajwan seeds; salt 

Tomato 

lime; cumin 

Green Salad 

olive oil with lemon juice 

Vinegar 

sweets 

Honeydew 

grated coconut with coriander; 
lemon; honey 

Wheat 

ginger 

Ice Cream 

cardamom; cloves 

Yogurt 

cumin; ginger 

KidneyBeans 

cumin; rock salt 

































Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 6: Nutrition 


Add a little water in another pot, place a steamer 
in the pot and put the eggplant and kerala in the 
steamer and boil for 2 to 3 minutes. 

When the food is ready, add the ghee or oil and 
three mustard seeds in a frying pan. Turn the heat 
to high until the seeds pop. Then reduce the flame 
to low add the rest of the spices, and stir until the 
aroma of the herbs is released. Add the barley and 
dal into the frying pan and stir for 15 to 30 sec¬ 
onds. Serve sweet mango chutney with the meal 
(about 3 teaspoons per person). This is readily 
available at Indian grocery stores. 


Overweight 

Serves: 4-5 people 
Preparation: 30 minutes 


Incompatible Foods 

Many diseases are caused by combining foods that 
aggravate create harmful, subtle chemicals in one’s 
body. Below is a partial list. 

1. Honey with ghee (in equal amounts) 

2. Honey with radish 

3. Yogurt with hot foods, milk, bananas, tea (ex¬ 
cept with balancing herbs) 

4. Milk with oil, salt, vinegar, green squash, rad¬ 
ish, bananas, lemons, oranges, plums candy, 
sesame, yogurt. 

5. Vinegar with sesame seeds 

6. Honey dew melon with honey, yogurt, or water 

7. Cucumber with water 

8. Rice with vinegar 

9. Meat with dairy, sesame, vinegar, or honey 

10. Hot foods and drinks with cold foods and drinks 

11. Cold drinks after cucumber or melons 
(SEE CHART ON PREVIOUS PAGE) 


1/2 cup barley 1/2 cup garbanzo beans 

2 1/2 cups peas 3 carrots 

1 tsp. guggul 1 tsp. turmeric 
1 tsp. cardamom 1 tsp. mustard seeds 
1 tsp. triphald 1 tsp. musta 

3 cups water 3 tsp. mustard or canola oil 


Suggested Reading 

Balch P, Balch J. Prescription for Cooking & 
DietaryWellness. Greenfield, IN: PAB Books; 
1992. 

Dash, B., Kashyap L. Materia Medica of Ayurveda. 
New Delhi, India: Insight Publishing 



Soak the barley and garbanzo beans overnight 
in water. Wash the peas and carrots. Scrape off the 
carrot s ki ns and slice into pieces. In separate pots, 
place the barley and the garbanzo beans. Add 11/2 
cups of water to each pot and bring to a boil. Lower 
the flame to a slow boil and cook for 10 minutes 
or until soft. Then steam the vegetables for 2 to 3 
minutes. 

Place the oil and three mustard seeds in a fry¬ 
ing pan and raise the flame to high. When the mus¬ 
tard seeds pop, reduce the flame to low and add 
the remaining herbs. Stir until the aromas of the 
herbs are released, and then add the barley. 


1987. 

Frawley D. Ayurveda Certification Course. Santa 
Fe, NM: American Institute of Vedic Studies; 
1992. 

Heinerman John. Encyclopedia of Nuts, Berries 
and Seeds. West Nyack, NY: Parker Publish¬ 
ing; 1995. 

Lad Usha, Vasant. Ayurvedic Cooking. Albuquer¬ 
que, NM: Ayurvedic Press; 1994 
Nadkarni K.N. Indian Materia Medica. Bombay, 
India: Popular Prakashan; 1993. 

Mindell Earl. The Vitamin Bible. New York, NY: 

Time Warner Books; 1991. 

Sachs Melanie. Ayurvedic Beauty Care. Twin 
Lakes, WI: Lotus Press; 1994. 

Sharma RK, Dash B. Charak Samhita (vol.l). 
Varanasi, India: Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series; 
1992. 





The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 



J MjdxrLcmljcjCLL § 7 It-IlLIlA- 











Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 7: Pancha Karma 


vT|FT FT^TT I 

'H1 4 - U R ^ ^T= # f*PT^ II8II 

Langhanam brimhanam kale rukshanam snehanam tatha. 
Svedanam stambhanam chaiva jdnite yah sa vai bhishak. 

One who knows how To reduce, nourish, dry, oleate, foment, 
and use the astringent therapies is the real physician. 

Charak Su:Ch. 22 verse 4 


Chapter 7 
Pancha Karma 


yurveda offers unique therapeutic measures 
that heal mild and chronic diseases. Even 
diseases that are believed to be incurable 
by modem medicine have been healed. Stories 
abound of people being carried into pancha karma 
centers, and a few weeks later, walking out on their 
own two feet, healthy and rejuvenated. Ayurveda 
is not based on magic; rather, it is based on under¬ 
standing medical principles and the six stages of 
illness. 

The most deeply seated toxins that cause dis¬ 
ease are heavy and sticky, lodging in the deepest tis¬ 
sue layers. Pancha Karma permanently eliminates 
these toxins from the body, allowing healing and res¬ 
toration of the tissues, channels, digestion, and men¬ 
tal functions. 

Six therapies are divided into two categories: 1) 
Toning or nourishing (brimhana or samtarpana), and 
2) Reducing or detoxifying (langhana or 
apartarpana) —those that cause lightness. 


Brimhana Lang 

(earth, water) (ether, 

;hana 

air, fire) 

Snehana Rukshana Sved 

Oil therapy) (drying) (swea 

Anuvasana 

Basti 

iana Stambhana 

ting) (astringent) 

FIGURE 1 


Brimhana tones because it uses therapies that pro¬ 
mote earth and water elements, while langhana light¬ 
ens by using ether, air, and fire elements to reduce. 
Illness is relieved as doshas become balanced through 
these therapies. 

The six major therapeutic categories are either 
toning or reducing in nature. 1. Reducing (langhana 
or lightening) the body, making it light. 

2. Nourishing (brimhana or expanding) the body by 
adding corpulence. 

3. Drying (rukshana) or producing roughness in the 
body. 

4. Oleation (snehana) or applying oil to the body 
creates softness, fluidity, and moistness. 

5. Sudation (svedhana) or sweating, removes 
stiffness, heaviness, and coldness. 6. Astringent 
(stambhana) balances the flow (slow or fast) of 
bodily fluids (e.g., diarrhea, bleeding, etc.), and 
prevents mobility. 

The therapeutic measures involved for each cat¬ 
egory primarily include herbs, foods, internal and 
external application of oils; fasting, and exercise. 
Below are listed the respective therapeutic measures, 

1. Lightening (langhana) —light, hot, sharp, non 
slimy, rough, subtle, dry, fluid, hard. 

Two forms of lightening exist: strong (shodhana) 
and mild (shamana). Shodhana expels the doshas 
out of the body through decoction enema, emesis, 



.t£ 'Mr 












The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


purgation of the body and head, and by bloodletting. 
Shamana is a palliative approach that, rather than 
expel the doshas, merely normali z es them through 
seven approaches. 1) Digestive, carminative herbs, 
2) Hunger-producing herbs, 3) Avoidance of food, 
4) Avoidance of drink, 5) Physical exercise, 6) Sun¬ 
bathing, 7) Exposure to wind. 

Palliative therapy is used by people with 
diabetes, poor digestion, excess watery conditions 
(e.g., congestion, overweight), toxic buildup (dma), 
and fevers. These measures are also used for stiff 
thighs, skin diseases, herpes, abscesses, spleen, head, 
throat and eye problems; and are provided to people 
during the cold season (Shishira —mid Jan. to mid 
March). 

Pitta and Kapha disorders follow shodhcina 
(strong) therapies of purgation and emesis. Symptoms 
include the presence of toxins, obesity, fever, vomiting 
or nausea, diarrhea, heart disease, constipation, 
heaviness, and excess belching. 

People with moderate symptoms of weight gain 
and medium strength are first given digestive herbs 
lik e ginger, cardamom, or cinnamon. Persons who 
need to boost their appetites are also given hunger- 
producing herbs like bibhltakl and guggul. Once the 
person is strengthened and digestion is improved, then 
both groups of herbs are administered, along with 
the other purificatory therapies, for a more thorough 
detoxification. 

Those people who are only mildly overweight, and 
of medium strong, and those who have medium 
strength and have dosha excesses, are advised to 
control their thirst and hunger. For people who are 
weak and ill, and are not yet able to withstand the 
stronger therapies, mild therapies are initially 
suggested (i.e., sun and wind bathing and mild 
exercise). 

Excess use of reduction therapies cause joint pain, 
body aches, cough, dry mouth, thirst, loss of appetite, 
anorexia, weakened hearing and sight. Further 
disorders include mental instability, excess fasting, a 
desire to enter dark places, emaciation, weakened 
digestion and depleted strength. Other imbalances are 
giddiness, cough, indigestion, insomnia, depletion of 
life sap (ojas) and semen; hunger, fever, delirium, 
and belching. Additional disorders include pain in 
the head, calves, thighs, shoulders, ribs, fatigue, 


vomiting, constipation, and difficult breathing. 


2. Nourishing ( brimhana )—heavy, cold, soft, 
unctuous, thick, bulky, slimy, sluggish, stable, smooth. 
This is also a shamana (palliative) therapy because it 
alleviates and/or mitigates both Vayu and Vayu/Pitta 
imbalances. This is mostly applied to the very weak 
or those with Vayu excesses. Included here are the 
very young, very old, emaciated, people suffering 
from lung injury, those experiencing grief, strain, 
dryness, excessive emission of semen or excess travel. 
Nourishing therapies may be given to everyone in 
the summer, depending upon the condition of their 
health. Nourishing therapies include bathing, oil 
massage, oil enema, sleep, nutritive enemas, warm 
mi lk with whole sugar, almonds, tahini, organic dairy 
and ghee. 

Excessive use of nourishing therapies causes 
obesity, congestion, difficult breathing, heart 
problems, diabetes, fever, enlarged abdomen, fistula- 
in-ano, and dma. Other developments include s kin 
disorders, cough, fainting, dysuria, poor digestion, 
and scrofula (TB of the neck lymph nodes). Further, 
if toxins are in the body, they should be eliminated 
before toning. 

To counter excessive use of nourishing therapies, 
antidotes include less sleep and the herbs guduchl, 
guggul, shildjit, amalaki, vidahga, trikatu, and chitrak, 
with honey. 

3. Drying (rukshana )—rough light, dry, sharp, hot, 
stable, non slimy, hard. Herbs and foods having 
pungent, bitter, and astringent tastes produce dryness. 
Usually, this therapy is applied when there are Kapha 
excesses and obstructions in the srotas (channels). 
These therapies are also used with major diseases 
involving the heart, urinary bladder, spastic thighs, 
gout, urinary disorders. 

Excessive use of drying therapies causes the 
same symptoms as excessive latighana therapies. 






Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 7: Pancha Karma 


4. Oleation ( snehana )—these qualities are liquid, 
subtle, fluid, unctuous, slimy, heavy, cold, sluggish, 
and soft. Medicated oils are used. Therapy lasts for 
3 to 7 days. This is discussed later in the chapter 
(abhyanga section, p. 207). 

5. Fomentation (svedhana)- these properties are hot, 
sharp, fluid, unctuous, rough, subtle, liquid, stable, 
and heavy. Sweating techniques such as warm water, 
poultice, and steam; and medicated lotions are used. 
This is discussed later in the chapter (abhyanga 
section, p. 207). 

6. Astringent ( stambhana )—qualities include cold, 
sluggish, soft, smooth, rough, subtle, liquid, stable, 
light VK+. Although this approach seems similar to 
lightening, astringents are used more for Pitta 
excesses, while lightening may be required for any 
dosha. 

Indications for using this therapy include excess 
Pitta, blackish complexion, bradycardia (less than 60 
heart beats per minute), alkali, diarrhea, vomiting, 
poisoning, and perspiration. 

Excessive use of astringents develops stiffness, 
anxiety, stiff jaw, cardiac arrest, constipation, cracked 
skin, dry mouth, thirst, and decreased appetite. Other 
conditions include memory loss, increase of upward 
moving Vayu, and malaise. 

All therapies fall into one of two categories, 
nourishing (santarpana), and depleting 
(apartarpana). 

Ashtanga Hridayam Su: Ch 12 verse 1 

Generally speaking, Kapha dosluis need reducing 
or depleting therapy to reduce earth and water 
excesses (toxic Pittas need a milder form of 
detoxification). Kaphas also need nourishing therapies 
for the ether, air, and fire elements of Vayu and Pitta. 
In fact, each dosha may need some form of 
detoxification, depending upon its condition. 

It is a unique insight of the Ayurvedic system that 
healing requires a removal of the toxins through one 
of the various reduction therapies. 

Then a nurturing therapy to build healthy new cells 
and tissues follows. To nourish before detoxifying 


would be adding to the preexisting toxins. In other 
words, nourishing therapies would only nourish the 
toxic condition. Only after toxins are removed can 
one begin to rebuild their system. 

Reduce - then Tone: Most people can use some 
degree of reducing, whether it is with herbs, fasts, 
sweating, etc., purifying the body, and preparing it 
for toning. 

When Not to Reduce: Some people, who are al¬ 
ready weakened by il lness—or the very old or very 
young—become even weaker through reduction. In 
these cases, a combination of the two methods is 
employed so the person’s strength is not depleted 
completely. Reducing and toning are used especially 
for long term therapies. 

Excess application of nourishing or depleting will 
cause diseases of the opposite nature. Generally, be¬ 
ing too thin is better than being too heavy because 
gaining weight is easier than losing it. 

Summary 


Dosha 

Main Use 

Kapha 

reduction 

Vayu 

toning 

Pitta 

both 


Dosha Reduction 

Dosha Therapy 

Kapha 

strong/fast, emesis 

Pitta/Blood 

moderate/purgation 

Vayu 

mild/enema 


Kapha is already heavy and needs to become 
lighter. Vayu is already light and needs to develop. 















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Nourishment 


Dosha 

Type of Therapy 

Kapha 

mild/light herbs like elcampane, 
pippall 

Pitta 

moderate/cooling herbs like 
shatavarl, aloe gel 

Vayu 

stron glashwagandha , ginseng, rich 
diet, oils 


When Used 


Reduce 

strong energy, strong pulse, good 
muscle tone or muscle tension, 
prominent tongue coating 

Nourish 

chronic low energy, weak pulse, 
emaciation, lack of muscle tone, 
flaccid or weak, obesity 


Results of therapeutic reducing include sharp, clear 
senses, removal of toxins, light body, appreciating 
the taste of foods, normal hunger and thirst. Other 
results include normal or healthy feeling in the heart 
and throat, little or no belching, reduction of disease 
severity, more enthusiasm, and removal of la z iness. 
Excess reducing produces emaciation, weakness, etc. 

Results of therapeutic toning include strength, a 
nourished mind and body, and healing of diseases 
related to being underweight and to having a weak 
immune system. Symptoms of excess toning include 
profound obesity, diabetes, fever, enlarged abdomen, 
cough, toxins, s ki n diseases, fistula. 

Note the difference between purification and pal¬ 
liation. If the aggravated humors are in the GI tract, 
they are ready for purification (pancha karma). If they 
are still in the dhatus, malas or ama (tissues, waste or 
undigested foods) they cannot be directly eliminated 
and palliation or pacifying methods are first needed. 

Toning/Shamana, Brimhana, and Snehana 
For Vayu and Pitta 


Reducing/Samshodhana 

Langhana 


Samshodhana 

(purifying) 

[strong] 

FIGURE 2A 


Samshodhana 


blood emesis purge enema naysa 
letting (dry) head 

( niruha ) purge 

FIGURE 2B 


Samshii 

imana 

1 1 

digestive thirst wii 
stimulants 

FIGURE 

\~n 

id air sun 

2C 


Samshodhana. [bloodletting, emesis (vamana), pur¬ 
gation (virechana), dry enema (niruha basti), and 
head purgation (nasya)] are all elements of the unique 
cleansing called pancha karma. This will be discussed 
later as the main healing approach for chronic dis¬ 
ease. It is used for excess Kapha, Pitta, fat, blood, 
wastes, minor Vayu disorders, along with the other 
doshas. These therapies are useful with diabetes, ama, 
poor digestion, fever, water retention, obesity, and 
stiff thighs. They are also used for s ki n disorders, 
herpes, abscesses, spleen, throat, head, and eye dis¬ 
orders, and used by everyone in the cold seasons. For 
s ki n diseases, diabetes, and high Vayu, reduction is 
not used between November and February. It is said 
that by undergoing samshodhana treatments, disease 
will not recur. 


Sainshamana 

(pacifying) 

[mild] 




























Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 7: Pancha Karma 


Samshamana, [digestive stimulants (including spices, 
fasting, and exercise), thirst, sun or wind bathing, and 
fresh air] are gentler therapies to pacify mild disor¬ 
ders. Strong persons may be healed just from exer¬ 
cise, sunbathing, and fresh air. Those with moderate 
strength begin with digestive stimulants including 
herbs. These therapies are used for vomiting, diar¬ 
rhea, heart diseases, cholera, intestinal disorders, fe¬ 
ver, constipation, heaviness, belching, nausea, anor¬ 
exia, Kapha, and Pitta. 

Shodhana reduces excess wastes, while 
shamana heals excess doshas. These therapies 
eliminate the wastes and balance the doshas. 


Summary 

Preliminary Therapies (Purva Karma) 

Before pancha karma is employed, persons first 
reduce the excessed doshas and cleanse dma (toxins) 
from their system. This is achieved by eating lightly 
spiced meals according to their dosha (see Chapter 
6 ). 

Ten therapies are useful in Purva karma, also 
known as palliation or Shamana. 


1. Body Oiling 

6. Food 

2. Sweat Therapy 

7. Aromatherapy 

3. Herbal Tonics 

8. Colors/ 
Meals/Environment 

4. Oils and Ghee 

9. Lifestyle 

5. Exercise 

10. Sadhand 


Herbs were discussed in detail in Chapter 4, and 
foods, nutrition and ghee were reviewed in the last 
chapter. Now, we take a closer look at body oil and 
sweat therapies. Later chapters will detail the remain¬ 
ing topics. Taking herbs and eating the proper diet 
according to one’s dosha are a long-term form of 
pancha karma. These 10 applications can be used 
independently of preliminary palliation to heal and 
help maintain one’s balance of physical and mental 
health. 


Palliation generally lasts for three months, one 
month, or one week. When an illness is chronic or 
strong, palliation may be shorter since the humors 
may be ready to be eliminated. Conversely, healthy 
persons undergoing pancha karma merely for 
enhancement or prevention may skip the palliation 
therapies. 


Long term palliation 

3 months 

Moderate palliation 

1 month 

Short term palliation 

1 week 


Snehana & Svedhana (Oleation & Sweating Meth¬ 
ods): After palliation therapies remove toxins, two 
main preliminary therapies are used, oleation and 
sweating. Both begin to unseat the toxins that have 
moved and situated themselves in places they do not 
belong. These relocated toxins are the cause of ill 
health or imbalance. 

Below is an overview of the 10 therapies and what 
measures are suggested for each dosha. Readers are 
advised to see their respective chapters for a complete 
understanding of their procedures. 


Shamana - Palliation 

L Oil Massage fSnehana] 

Vayu—lots of sesame oil with mahdndrdyan and 
castor oil are best. Massage should be warm, gentle 
and firm. Oils are only used after most of the dma is 
removed by eating hot spices. 

Pitta—touch is soothing, fight, gentle, slightly cool 
with a moderate amount of oil (cool cocoanut, ghee, 
safflower), brdhml (gotu kola), or mahdndrdyan oil 
is also applied. 

Kapha—strong, dry, or with fight and hot oils (i.e., 
mustard, canola, olive), deep tissue, perhaps with 
some slight pain. Also, dashmul oil is helpful for 
Kapha doshas. 

2. Sweat Therapy fSvedhana 1 

Vayu—(mild) brief steam baths or hot tubs (head 
is kept out of the heat), or ingesting mild diaphoret- 

Xk 





















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


ics like nirgundl, cinnamon, and ginger, or tonics like 
bald, comfrey, or dashmul. They need to drink plenty 
of liquids to replenish the water (during and after 
sweating) or they will become too dry. Too much 
sweating may lead to dizziness, convulsions, faint¬ 
ing, or vertigo. 

Pitta—cool or mild sweating using cool and 
dispersing herbs (i.e., kutki, yellow dock, burdock) 
followed by a cool shower. During excess sweating 
one may feel thirsty, develop burning sensations, feel 
dizzy, or develop a fever. 

Kapha—strong, dry heat, hot diaphoretics and 
expectorants (i.e., ginger, sage, pippall, cinnamon). 
One sweats until one begins to feel uncomfortable, 
but not exhausted. 


3. Herbal Tonics 

Vayu— shatdvarl, ashwagandha, bald, 
triphald with digestive spices like ginger or cinnamon, 
and herbal wines like draksha are useful. Excessive 
use of these herbs aggravates Vayu, coats the tongue, 
distends the abdomen, and may cause constipation. 

Pitta—cool, bitter, astringent alteratives, aloe gel, 
barberry, dandelion, burdock, red clover, pau d’arco, 
brdhml, manjishthd, comfrey, and coriander. These 
are all blood and bile cleansers, and drain the excess 
heat from the body. 

Kapha—hot, dry, pungents (i.e., ginger, pippall, 
myrrh, trikatu), bitters (i.e., aloe, turmeric, barberry) 
reduce fat. Herbs are most effective when taken with 
a little raw honey (which helps loosen phlegm). 

4. Oils & Ghee 

Vayu—(daily use of sesame or ghee —1 to 2 tbs.— 
taken internally). This moistens the dry Vayu 
membranes and tissues, and softens and loosens dry 
and hardened toxins in the body tissues. 

Pitta— ghee, internal (1 to 2 tbs. daily) and 
external (especially in eyes). Triphald or brdhml ghee 
are the suggested medicated ghees. 

Kapha—1 to 2 tsp. daily of mustard, canola, and 
flax seed oils are taken internally. These oils loosen 
phlegm. 


5. Exercise 

Vayu—mild exercise, calming yoga postures 
(sitting or lying down) and gentle breathing exercises 
also strengthen (see the hatha yoga chapter). Mild 
sunbathing (avoiding wind and cold) and daily 
sadhana (meditation) automatically heal the mind and 
body. 

Pitta—moderate amount, in cool air or wind, w alks 
taken during the full moon and other moderate 
activities like flower gardening. Cooling Yoga 
postures, like shoulder stands or sitting and lying 
down, and prdndydm are suggested. People with heart 
problems are advised not to do shoulder stands. The 
best prdndydm for Pitta is shltall and lunar practices 
(see Chapter 9). Both are best taught by a qualified 
yoga or prdndydm instructor, rather than by clients 
trying on their own. Exercise that creates excess heat 
and sweating (i.e., aerobics, heavy exertion, exercising 
under a hot sun) are contraindicated. 

Kapha—strong aerobics (e.g., jogging in the wind 
and sun), long hik es, camping, and strong physical 
labor. One must first be healthy and strong enough to 
exercise at this level. If persons sweat or exercise too 
much they feel tired afterwards. 

6. Food 

Vayu—adequate, nutritious, Vayu reducing (i.e., 
dairy, nuts, grains of basmati rice, oats, and wheat, 
root vegetables, sweet fruits, boiled milk with ginger, 
cardamom, cinnamon, fennel). One should eat 
nutritiously; overeating should be avoided. Fasts for 
1 to 3 days, with ginger and cinnamon tea, are all 
right for those who are strong enough. (Meat is used 
when one is recovering from a debilitating illness). 

Pitta—moderate and cool Pitta reduction, sweet 
fruits, raw or lightly steamed vegetables, green veg¬ 
etable juice, cool grains like rice, oats, and wheat, 
and yellow split mungdal (or whole mung beans). 
Spices include coriander, cumin, fennel—cool spices. 
Hot spices should be avoided, as are salt and vinegar. 
Moderate fasts with cool herbs (i.e., dandelion or 
burdock), green vegetable juices or fruit juices (i.e., 
pineapple or pomegranate) are also suggested. Weak 
Pittas may take more dairy (preferably organic— no 
drugs or steroids fed to the animals, and from con¬ 
tented animals—not factory-herded ones). 










Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 7: Pancha Karma 


Kapha—light, anti-Kapha, steamed diuretic 
vegetables, diuretic grains, beans, hot spices, reduce 
water and juice consumption. Fasting on spices and 
honey from 3 to 7 days is suggested. Overall, sugar, 
sweet foods, dairy, heavy oils, and meats should be 
avoided. 


7. Aromas 

While aromatherapy is not technically a 
consideration of samshamana, it is incorporated here 
for additional therapeutic value. Aromas work more 
on the mind than the body, so they help balance 
psychological causes of illness. 

Vayu—sandalwood, frankincense, cedar, and 
myrrh, are calming and grounding. 

Pitta (cool)—oils, incense, soaps, sachets of 
sandalwood, rose, geranium, and other flower scents 
open the heart and reduce fire. 

Kapha—oils, incense, soap, sachets etc. of 
myrrh, frankincense, cedar, eucalyptus, sage. 

8. Colors/Environment/Meals 

Fresh air, wind, and sun help stimulate digestion 
in mild cases of illness. While color therapy is not 
technically a consideration of samshamana, it is 
incorporated here for additional therapeutic value. 
Colors work more on the mind than the body, so they 
help balance psychological causes of illness. 

Vayu—balancing therapies include short fasts (1 
to 3 days), being warm and comfortable inside and 
outside the home, moist air (for one living in a dry 
climate), and mild sunbathing. Wear warm colors of 
red, orange, and gold. White (a moist color) also 
balances mild Vayu excesses. The bed should be soft 
and comfortable. The environment should be 
pleasing. One must adopt measures for self-care. 

Pitta—mild fasts (about one week), air and wind 
bathing reduce excess heat. Cool-colored clothing 
(i.e., white and pale shades of green, pink, and blue) 
are also balancing. 

Kapha—sunbathing, fresh air, long fasts, warm 
color therapy—red, orange, yellow in clothes, 
furniture, and decor—in both home and office— 
balances excess Kapha. 


9. Lifestyle 

Vayu—resting the body and mind. Excess 
traveling, noise, distractions are avoided, sleeping 
during the day, if tired, and having a secure and stable 
lifestyle—with happiness, contentment and joy—is 
suggested. Mild exercise (stop when perspiration 
begins) is useful. 

Pitta—cool, pleasing environments, cool 
breezes, moonlight, avoiding sun, heat, and fire. 
Relaxation is advised, doing various or diverse things, 
allowing time for amusement and play, practicing 
sweet, affectionate, loving, friendly behavior; being 
near water and gardens. Conflict, arguments, 
aggression, ambition, strain, and overwork, and effort 
are avoided. Moderate exercise is useful (stop when 
perspiration begins). 

Kapha—dry, rough clothes and environment (i.e., 
austere life—sleeping on the floor, physical labor, 
staying up late at night, not napping or sleeping late), 
avoiding cold and damp; and being in hot, dry, sunny, 
fiery, and warm breezy places. This is a time one when 
breaks attachments and habits—giving up the past 
(mentally) and possessions. Strong exercise is useful 
(exercise a little past the point of fatigue). 

10. Sadhana 

Vayu—for calm and peace—allows one to be less 
talkative, or even silent, emptying the mind of 
thoughts, worry etc.; surrendering fears, and anxieties 
is also practiced. 

Pitta—one focuses on positive energies of love, 
peace, forgiveness, visualization, and artistic 
creativity. 

Kapha—practices active meditation, (e.g., study, 
thinking, inquiring, reading scriptures, chanting aloud, 
dancing, and singing) stimulates and activates the 
mind until one feels strained. 










The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Purification Therapy 
(Shodhana) 

Unique to Ayurveda is a process of completely 
expelling toxins from the body. First, through 
palliation and purification, one loosens toxins lodged 
in the body. This allows the toxins to return through 
the bloodstream to their origin sites in the 
gastrointestinal tract. Once there, the toxins can be 
completely expelled from the body through five 
methods known as pancha karma. Pancha karma (five 
actions) actually includes three stages (see table 
below). 

Therapy Description 

1. Preliminary (palliative) 

employing oil and sweating methods (snehana 
and svedhana). [often used throughout the year as 
a general maintenance and preventive program] 

2. Primary purificatory practices( pancha karma) 
uses emesis, purgation, enemas, nasal therapy. 

3. Post PK therapies 

rejuvenation and tonification. 


Oil Therapy 
(Snehana) 

Using oils, both internally and externally, is a very 
important Ayurvedic therapy 

Warm, medicinal oils are applied in large 
amounts all over the body. Some practitioners use 
sesame oil for all three constitutions. Others use 
medicated oils like mahdnardyan oil. Still others use 
medicated oils in specific body sites, such as on the 
chakras and manna points, or at specific trouble spots. 
Essential oils may also be employed according to the 
doshas. It is the use of the oil that is important, and 
not the massage technique or training. (Actually, a 
professional massage produces the same effects as 
snehana and svedhana). Specific Ayurvedic massage¬ 
like techniques (abhyahga) will be discussed later. 
Along with the application of oil, intake of oil or ghee 
(snehapdna) is also recommended. Sesame oil or ghee 
is used for Vayu, sunflower or ghee for Pitta, and 


mustard, canola, or flax seed oils for Kapha. 

Oil Uses: Oils help loosen and liquefy toxins and 
humors in the skin and blood (called the outer disease 
pathway), dislodging and removing the heavy, sticky 
toxins from the smallest channels. Thus, toxins begin 
to drain from the central disease pathway (deeper 
tissues) and start to flow into the GI tract. Secretions 
are also activated, enabling easier dosha transport of 
toxins (dma) and wastes (malas) as they return to the 
GI tract for elimination. Oil lubricates and protects 
tissues from damage, as dma returns to the GI tract. 
Finally, since Vayu is responsible for movement, oil 
lubrication restores proper Vayu functioning, allowing 
for proper flowing of wastes and toxins to their 
removal sites. 

Special herbs blended with the oils enable the 
tissues to expel the oil from tissues. Therefore, oil 
does not accumulate in the body. Herbs like guduchl, 
katuka, haritaki, yashtlmadhu (licorice), and chitrak 
have bitter properties that cause oils to be expelled. 
Specific oil massage (abhyahga) therapies are 
discussed later in this chapter. 

Oils and purificatory therapies are useful for 
arthritis, insomnia, paralysis, tremors, convulsions, 
nervous exhaustion, dry cough, constipation, and 
other Vayu derangements. Oil is also useful for 
alcohol addiction, the elderly, children, eye problems, 
tumors, sinus conditions, worms, ulcers, memory, 
dryness, poisons, Vayu, Pitta, and Kapha diseases. 
Such therapies promote alertness, slimming, toning, 
and studying the body; improving strength, voice, 
complexion, and they cleanse the female genital 
passage. Oil builds plasma, reproductive fluid and 
ojas (life-sap). Kapha doshas use oil for worms and 
gas. 







Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 7: Pancha Karma 


Sesame is the best oil. Overall, oil reduces Vayu, is 
neutral for Kapha, and increases Pitta. Oils are used 
during the rainy season. 

Contraindications: There are some people for whom 
oleation is not recommended. They in-clude people 
who have very weak or very strong digestion, who 
are very obese, who have stiff thighs, or who suffer 
from diarrhea and toxins (i.e., they must be expelled 
first). Oleation is also not used to treat throat diseases, 
enlarged abdo-men, fainting, vomiting, anorexia, 
abnormal child delivery, Kapha excesses, or 
inebriation. Instead, clients are given nasal, enema, 
and pur-gative therapies. Charak notes that while oil 
reduces Vayu, it does not aggravate Kapha (as long 
as oils are warmed). 

Ghee Uses: Ghee is best used for improving intellect, 
memory, and intelligence; plasma, re-productive fluid, 
and ojas (life-sap). It helps soften the body, and 
promotes clear voice and complexion. 

Vayu: Medicated ghee, or ghee and black salt. 

Its moistness balances Vayu. 

Pitta: Plain ghee. Its cool and sweet nature 
balances Pitta. 

Kapha: Ghee with barley and trikatu (empow¬ 
ers the herbs). 

Ghee is used in the autumn. For Vayu/Pitta 
imbalances in the summer, evening oleation is 
advised. For aggravated Kapha, and throughout the 
winter, unction on sunny days is advised. In 
emergencies, and for those with extreme Vayu 
disorders, oleation may be used anytime. Ingest-ing 
ghee (snehapdna) follows the same schedule. 


After taking ghee, one drinks hot water. After oil, 
one drinks boiled rice water. This should cause 
belching and a desire to eat. If one feels thirsty, they 
may stimulate the regurgitating re-flex. Afterwards, 
cool baths, head plasters, or towels are used. Those 
with strong digestion can take more oleation. Those 
with moderate diges-tion can use moderate amounts 
of oil or ghee, and those with weaker digestion use 
less unction. Results of snehana include proper flow 
of Vayu, improved digestion, proper feces, moistness, 
and initial fatigue. 

As the snehana begins to get digested, one may 
experience thirst, vertigo, lassitude, mental 
disturbance, and burning sensations. After olea-tion, 
one needs to rest, get to sleep early, avoid exposure 
to wind and hot sun. One should ob-serve celibacy, 
and eat light, simple foods, ac-cording to one’s dosha, 
and not suppress bodily urges. If this is not followed, 
serious diseases may develop. After snehana is 
digested, one takes a hot shower, then eats a small 
portion of plain rice or barley (at room temperature). 

Snehana therapy lasts an average of 3 to 7 days, or 
until the symptoms disappear. The elderly, the weak, 
the very young, and those with thirst should take such 
therapy with lunch. Persons currently drinking wine 
are not eligible for sne-hana. Vayu dosha follows 
snehana for 7 days, Pitta for 5 days and Kapha for 3 
days. 


Dosha 

Days for Therapy 

Vayu 

7 

Pitta 

5 

Kapha 

3 


Precautions: Do not use snehana for ascites, fe-ver, 
delirium, drinking or with alcoholism, loss of appetite, 
vomiting, fatigue, on cloudy days, rainy season, after 
basti, purgative emetics or nasya, after premature 
birth, for too strong or weak digestion, stiff thighs, 
diarrhea, ama, throat diseases, artificial poisoning, 
enlarged abdomen, fainting. Do not use oil for coma, 
thirst, anal secretions, pregnancy, and excess 
salivation. Use drying herbs for 10 days following 
child-birth. 


Dose: There are 3 doses of drinking snehana, 
according to the strength of the dosha . 

Mild Strength: Vayu—oil stays in the system for 
9 hours. This dose is for slight aggravation. 














The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Its application develops the appetite. Use for 3 
days. 

Medium Strength: Pitta—oil stays in the system 
for 6 hours. It is for moderate aggravation, and builds 
and tones the system. Use for 4 to 6 days. 

High Strength: Kapha—oil stays in the system for 
3 hours. It acts as an emollient for extreme 
aggravation. Use for 7 days. 


Dosha 

Hours 

Vayu 

9 

Pitta 

6 

Kapha 

3 




Doses: Depending upon the strength of the person 
and the severity of the disease, mild, moderate or high 
doses are used. Snehana is ingested either first thing 
in the morning or late in the afternoon (ideally 3:00 
to 6:00 a.m. or p.m.) on an empty stomach. Only when 
the appetite returns does one eat. 

Mild: One to 4 days. The diet during snehana involves 
3 days of avoiding very fatty foods, eating simply, no 
food combining and eating warm, regular quantities 
(according to one’s constitution or dosha). Before and 
after snehana, take warm baths and drink warm water; 
be celibate. Avoid becoming stressed, angry, or grief 
stricken. Avoid exposure to cold, sun, travel, talking, 
naps, and pollution. Do not suppress natural urges. 
Take the dose just after sunrise. 




Tryahena shleshmikah snlhyat pahcharatrena 
paitikah 

Vatikah sapta rdtrena sdtmyatan param 
[Reference Bhog] 


Moderate: Four to 6 days. Avoid sticky, oily, and 
incompatible foods. 

High: Seven days/with hard bowels or until healthy 
symptoms appear. The high dose always causes 
intolerance, but persons are made to drink by holding 
their nose and closing their eyes while drinking. 


Drinking Snehapana 


Day 

Dose 

Dosha 

Test Dose 

1 oz. 

Kapha 

1 

2 oz. 

2 

3 oz. 

3 

4 oz. 

Pitta 

4 

5 oz. 

5 

6 oz. 

Vayu 

6 

7 oz. 

7 

8 oz. 


Some authorities suggest always using 7 days of 
oleation in order to reach all 7 tissue layers. Others 
follow the mild, medium, and high doses, depending 
on which dhatus are unbalanced. Signs of effective 
oleation include soft, shiny skin, softer s ki n and hair, 
healthy elimination of stool that looks yellowish, 
shiny, oily, and softer; urine may look brighter, and 
urine and stool smell like ghee. Eye, ear, and nose 
secretions shine slightly. Mental clarity, enthusiasm, 
energy, and strength increase. 

If diarrhea results from snehana, then persons have 
only moderate or mild symptoms; for the 3rd and 4th 
days of snehana, lemon juice is added to the snehana 
formula (ghee with hot water may be used. Oil with 
vegetable soup or hot water is an alternative). 


Various authors offer other suggestions. 


4P- 
































Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 7: Pancha Karma 


Shodhana (purification): Drink alone, soon after 
digestion, drink the large or maximum dose. 
Shamana (removal of mild dosha/* disease 

symptoms): Use a medium dose with fasting. 
Brimhana (toning): Take the minimum dose (a 
small quantity) with food. 

Precautions: Snehcipcina is not used for indigestion, 
abdominal enlargement, acute fever, weakness, 
anorexia, obesity, fits, intoxication, immediately after 
basti (enema), vamana (vomiting), virechana 
(purgation), with thirst, fatigue, after premature 
delivery, or on rainy days. 

Depending on when snehana is taken, different 
parts of the body will be affected. 


Meal 

Body Part Affected 

Before 

Lower 

During 

Middle 

After 

Upper 


Unctuous Substances: Those who cannot comfort¬ 
ably ingest plain oil or ghee may begin by eating unc¬ 
tuous items. These substances include porridge 
(odana), gruel (vilepi —grain with 4 to 8 times as 
much water), gruel ( yavdgu —grain with 6 times as 
much water), legumes, curry, vegetable soup, 
kambalika (curd, rock salt, sesame oil, and ghee), 
sesame oil or sesame butter, sugar, organic milk, ghee, 
lassi, pippall, and shatdvan. 

Vayu doshas do well with a little rock salt. 

Pitta doshas do well with ghee. Kapha 
doshas do well with t rikatu. 

For worms, a large dose of sesame oil is used. 


Seasonal Use of Oil and Ghee 


Fall 

cow ghee 

Rainy 

oil 

Summer 

Vayu and Pitta excesses, joint 
pain—oil used in evenings 

Winter 

Kapha/Vayu and Kapha/Pitta 
excesses or joint pain—oil 
used in the afternoon 

Cold 

Winter 

15 to 30 minutes after sunrise 
and for joint problems—oil 


Herbs for particular diseases may be cooked in 
the ghee or oil to apply snehana more effectively. 
For example, gokshura may be added to oil for uri¬ 
nary problems. 


Three 

degrees of Boiling Oil and Ghee 


Boil 

Consistency 

Use 

Errhines 

mild 

hard/dry 

with 

food/drink 

DrinksXBasti 

medium 

wax- like 

errhines/ 

salves 

Anoint 

hard 

clear/black 

basti/ear 

drops 


Ghee is ready when froth and cooking sounds dis¬ 
appear, and the ghee emits an aroma. Oil is ready 
when it becomes frothy on the surface, and an aroma 
develops. 



Sample Recipes 

1. Pippall, rock salt, yogurt, sesame oil, or ghee. This 
sneha produces quick results. 2. Barley with milk, 
and a small amount of rice and ghee. 

3. Milk, ghee, cane sugar. This is an instant emulsive 
preparation. 

4. Barley fried in sesame oil, 1/2 boiled molasses, 
rice, green dal, milk, ghee, lassi, jaggery, and salt. 

































The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


This preparation causes tissues to exude, entering 
minute pores, not drying, and spreading through¬ 
out the body warming and transforming) [i.e., for 
immediate oleation effects]. 

Precautions: Do not use this formula for s ki n 
diseases, edema, diabetes. Instead use, 4a. 

Triphald, pippall, guggul, shildjit, gokshura, ghee. 

Oil snehana is very good for tumors, sinus ul¬ 
cers, worms, excess Kapha, fat, and Vayu. It improves 
digestion, clears the digestive tract, strengthens the 
tissues, senses, slows the aging process, and improves 
complexion. 

Other snehana therapies include oil massage, en¬ 
ema, douche, gargle, nose, ear, and eye drops, (See 
pages 197 - 201 and 242 - 244) 

Inadequate snehana administration: Causes dry¬ 
ness, burning, weakness, and slower digestion. 

Excess snehana administration: Causes yellow com¬ 
plexion, heaviness, stuffiness, undigested food in the 
stool, dullness, anorexia, nausea, vomiting. 

Complications: Indigestion, thirst, fainting, dullness, 
nausea, tympanitis (inner ear inflammation), fever, 
stiffness, anorexia, abdominal pain, slowed digestion. 
If ghee causes abdominal pain, hot water should be 
drunk to produce vomiting. For severe thirst due to 
excessive digestive fire, cold water should be drunk 
after sneha. 

Chronic Symptoms: Dry skin, itching, anemia, 
edema, GI diseases, sprue (malabsorption of nutri¬ 
ents in the intestines, leading to diarrhea, emaciation, 
and anemia), hemorrhoids, numbness, difficult 
speech. 

Other forms of oleation include abhyahga, lepa, 
ganclusha (mouth gargling), head, ear, and eye baths. 
These will all be discussed later under Kerala 
abhyahga (except for gandusha, which is discussed 
in Chapter 19 under mouth conditions and therapies). 
Application of oil and oil pastes are discussed below. 


Sudation or Sweat Therapy 
(Svedhana) 

5(4 T*rfrf 53^*30 

Snigdhasya sukshmeshva yaneshu llnam 
svedastu dosham nayati drivatvam 

Sweat applied to uncted persons liquefy impu¬ 
rities hidden in minute channels. 
Charak: Sidd. Ch. 1, verse 8 

According to Ashtanga Hridayam, after oleation, 
steam or sweating therapies are employed for effective 
dislodging and liquefying of toxins and improving 
digestion. Svedhana causes the body’s channels to 
widen, enabling dma to easily flow from the tissues 
back to the GI tract and improve circulation. Heat 
allows the s ki n and blood (outer disease pathway) to 
be cleansed. This relieves, cleanses, and reduces fat 
tissue and muscle tension. 

Heat also restores balance to Vayu and Kapha (i.e., 
removing coldness and stiffness) and reduces the 
heavy, sticky nature of dma. Once toxins are back in 
the G.I. tract, they are ready to be completely expelled 
from the body through pahcha karma (five 
purificatory actions). 

Internal (e.g., spicy herbs) and external (e.g., 
jacuzzi, sauna) heat are used to dislodge wastes and 
toxins. Castor, arka, red punarnavd, sesame, and 
barley all induce sweat. 

Four types of Svedhana therapies exist, 

1. Tdpa or fomentation—placing a heated cloth, a 
metal object or warm hands on the body. This therapy 
is best for Vayu and Kapha doshas. 

2. Upandha or applying a hot poultice to the body 
(before bed) made with the appropriate herbs and 
foods to reduce the respective aggravated doshas. 
After the poultice is applied, an oiled and heated silk 
or woolen cloth is wrapped around the body, and the 














Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 7: Pancha Karma 


person goes to sleep for the night. It is removed in 
the morning (in the winter it may be kept on longer). 
This therapy is best for Vayu disorders. General 
ingredients include wheat, barley, unctuous 
substances, kushta, kdkoll, and kshlr-kdkoll. 

Vayu: Poultices include vachd, aromatic herbs, 
yeast, licorice, cedar, castor oil, ghee, lassi, milk. 

Vayu/Kapha: Triphala, trikatu. 

Vayu/Pitta: Gucluchl, licorice. 


include castor, vasa, vamsha, arka, turmeric, and lico¬ 
rice. 

Two types of drava exist, 

1. Parisheka: Medicated liquid is applied to 
specific body parts (that are covered in cloth). 

2. Avagdhan: Persons soak in a tub fil led with a 
medicated decoction. 


Upandha Recipe: General suggestions include 
Vayu-reducing herbs, sour juice, milk, and a little 
rock salt. Boil until it becomes a thick liquid and apply 
to the whole body (in the direction against the hairs). 
When it becomes cold, reapply. This process is 
repeated many times. 

Other heating therapies include exercise, staying in 
warm, draftless rooms, wrapping oneself in heavy 
clothes, and sunbathing. 


3. Ushmd or warm steam is used by boiling the ap¬ 
propriate foods and herbs for a dosha, and allowing 
the steam to surround the body. Steam may be ap¬ 
plied with a sweat box (with the head kept free from 
heat) or apparatus like a pressure cooker. Appropri¬ 
ate herbs are added to the water in the pot. The steam 
is applied locally to an illness spot, like arthritis. This 
therapy is used for Vayu and Kapha imbalances. 

Stones, pebbles, mud, leaves, and sand are also 
heated and applied to specific body parts. They are 
more useful in Kapha disorders as they are a form of 
dry heat. 


4. Drava or Dhdird means pouring warm, medicated 
liquid over the body. Again, herbs and foods are used 
to reduce the respective excessed doshas (or for spe¬ 
cific health concerns). This method is useful for dma, 
Kapha, and fat excesses, stiff thighs, and breast milk 
disorders. The part of the body needing attention is 
covered with a cloth, and then the medicated water is 
slowly poured over the cloth. When Vayu disturbs 
the entire body, a medicated water bath is used. The 
water temperature is 85 to 100 degrees. This is also 
useful for all diseases of the rectum and urinary tract. 
Drava is used for Vayu/Pitta disorders. Useful herbs 


Svedhana is best used for Vayu disorders (i.e., 
nervous conditions). It is used only after one has 
undergone snehana (internal and external oil 
application), is in a warm room protected from 
breezes and has fully digested their last meal. Sudation 
is applied in strong, moderate, or mild measure, 
depending upon the strength of the person undergoing 
therapy. 

Sessions last 5 to 10 minutes for Vayu and Pitta 
doshas, and 10 to 15 minutes for Kapha doshas. 
Alternately, a strong intensity is used for strong 
persons or severe diseases; moderate intensity is used 
for persons with moderate strength or moderate 
diseases; and a minimum intensity is used for persons 
with minimal strength or minor diseases. 

Kapha doshas use a dry sudation (dry heat and 
warming oils—for example, sitting under a blanket 
with a space heater). Kapha/Vayu doshas use both 
dry heat and oily liquids (e.g., ghee). They can sweat 
in warm rooms or in the sunlight. Ghee is used in 
situations such as a Vayu excess in the stomach and 
a Kapha excess in the colon. If used, sudation should 
be administered very gently on the testes, heart, and 
eyes. A cool cloth should be placed over these areas 
to prevent exposure to heat. 

For Vayu/Kapha excesses, (e.g., Vayu in the 
stomach) first clients sweat without oil, then with oil. 
For Kapha/Vayu excesses, (i.e., Kapha in the colon) 
first clients are given oil/steam, then a steam treatment 
without oil). 

Svedhana is suggested for cough, cold, earache, 
headache, monoplegia, hemiplegia, paraplegia, 
constipation, absence or retention of urine. It is also 
indicated for stiffness and tetany arthritis (muscle 









The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


spasms and tremors caused by poor metabolism of 
calcium, and associated with poor parathyroid gland 
functioning). It is also good for enlarged spleen, 
fistula-in-ano, hemorrhoids, renal calculi, and before 
surgery. Svedhana is also advised after an operation 
that removes a foreign object, or after abnormal, 
premature or normal delivery. 

^71% Hl<9 4Wlll£<l'l4dl I I?? 11 

Shitasulavyuparame stambhagauravanigrahe. 

Samjate mardave svede svedanadbhiratirmata. 

Svedhana is stopped only when cold, colic pain, 
stiffness and heaviness subsides in the body, 

or until softness and sweating are produced. 

Charak Su, Ch. 14, verse 13 


Three Types of Sweat 



External heat (e.g., steam)—use fire 

1 

Internal heat (exercise, warm clothes, 
etc.)—no fire 


Whole body (external heat) 

2 

Part of the body (e.g., shoulder— nadi, 
parisheka ) 


With oil (wet)—for Vayu—fire/no fire 

3 

Without oil (dry)—for Kapha—fire/no 
fire 


13 Sveda Forms 

According to Charak Samhita, 13 forms of sveda 
(sweat) are available; some use fire to generate heat, 
some do not. Oil abhyahga is required before 
initiating any of the methods. 

Whole Body Svedas 

1. Sankara Sveda: (use of bolus). Pinda Sveda is 


such a therapy. It is discussed in detail on page 235. 

2. Jentdka Sveda:, 3. Prastara Sveda: Similar to 
sauna rooms. 

4. Avagdhan Sveda: Persons lie in a tub filled with a 
medicated decoction, milk, oil, or ghee. It is 
administered every other day or every two days. This 
process dilates the veins, arteries, hair follicles, and 
strengthens the body. It is useful for Vayu disorders, 
hemorrhoids, dysuria, and other painful diseases. 

A person either sits in a tub fi ll ed with a decoc¬ 
tion until they begin to sweat, or sits in a tub and has 
oil, milk, or ghee poured over their shoulders until 
the liquid reaches six inches above their navel. 

After the medicated bath, persons are first mas¬ 
saged, then take a warm bath (in plain water), and eat 
nourishing foods according to their dosha. They rest 
for the remainder of the day. 

The therapy sessions cease after one feels relief 
from cold, pain, stiffness, heaviness, and develops a 
good appetite and softness of body parts. 

5. Ashmaghana Sveda, 6. Karshu Sveda, 7. Kutl 
Sveda, 8. Bhu Sveda, 9. Kumbhl Sveda, 10. Kupa 
Sveda, 11. Holdka Sveda: Other ancient forms that 
can be replaced by modem steam tents. 



Partial Body Svedas 

12. Nadi Sveda: Herbal decoctions are heated over a 
low flame in a pressure cooker, steamer, or covered 
pot with a hose placed over a hole in the top, and 
pointed at the sore spot (e.g., bursitis), joint pain, or 
other local condition. 





























Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 7: Pancha Karma 



Sweat Box: 

Woman with psoriasis undergoing svedhana in India 




PARISHEKA SVEDA PITCHER 


Man with hemiplegia is undergoing Nadi Sveda in India 


Sveda Preparations: Vayu people must drink enough 
fluids before sweating. Sour juices like lemon or 
lime with a little rock or sea salt prevent dehydra¬ 
tion and excess sweating. Caution is advised not to 
allow the steam to create excess dryness for Vayu 
doshas. Kapha prakriti can promote stronger sweat¬ 
ing by the use of long pepper, black pepper, and 
ginger (trikatu), or some similar formulas. For Pitta 


. fg "5* 


The tube has two or three curves to lessen the heat 
of the vapor. Traditionally, the hose lengths are either 
91.44cm/@36” (high dose), or 45.86cm/@ 18” (low 
dose). The circumference of the tube is 22.86cm/@9” 
at the steamer and 11.43cm/@4.5” towards the body 
joint. 

Aromatic, channel-clearing herbs (eucalyptus, cin¬ 
namon, camphor, calamus, sage, dashmul (10 roots) 
are used with emollient tonics (i.e., shatdvarl, bald, 
ashwagandha, comfrey root, or marshmallow). Emol¬ 
lients are used to soften, protect and heal. Steam bums 
up localized toxins and restores or stimulates circu¬ 
lation at these sites. 

V ay u/Kapha— dashmul 
Kapha— varuna, guduchl, erand, vdsd, arka, 
and vamsha. 


13. Parisheka Sveda: The specific body part that 
needs therapy is covered with a thin cloth. Then, a 
decoction made with herbs suitable for the condi¬ 
tion is heated and poured into a pitcher that has small 
holes in its bottom. The pitcher is held over the body 
part and the decoction sprinkled over the cloth. Suit¬ 
able ingredients include grape juice, sugarcane juice, 
rice water, sugar water, yogurt, honey water, barley, 
cedar, ghee, acidic herbs, milk, and sweet herbs. 


















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


doshas who have no Pitta diseases, burdock, dande¬ 
lion, or red clover teas are drunk. This helps cleanse 
the blood. Hibiscus or other astringents help prevent 
excess sweating or heat buildup. It is advised not to 
overheat the Pitta dosha with steam. All are advised 
to keep the head (and eyes), heart, and groin cool 
throughout the therapy. Cold, wet towels may be 
placed on these sites to prevent them from becoming 
overheated. A pearl necklace may also be placed on 
these sites to keep them cool. 

Signs of Proper Svedhana: Sweat, reddish skin, body 
warmth and lack of chill or stiffness. Persons will 
feel more enthusiastic and light. 

Contraindications: Sudation is not administered to 
the very obese, dry, weak, those with debilitating chest 
injuries, those suffering from emaciation, or to those 
with diseases stemming from alcohol usage or with 
alcoholism. It is not used for blindness, abdominal 
disorders (udara roga), herpes, skin diseases, TB, 
gout, or administered to those who have just eaten 
dairy, fats, and honey; nor is it used after purgation or 
for prolapse and burns of the rectum. Further 
symptoms requiring avoidance of sudation include 
heart disease, high blood pressure, blood disorders 
(e.g., anemia, leukemia), exhaustion, anger, grief, fear, 
excess hunger, thirst, sweat; and jaundice, Pitta 
diabetes, or Pitta diseases (chemical). Sudation is also 
not administered to pregnant or menstruating women 
(or those who have recently given birth). It is not given 
to one who has fainted, undergoing sthambhana 
(astringent) therapy, wasting, bleeding, diarrhea, low 
ojas, starving. In emergencies, people with these 
diseases are given mild sudation or nadi sveda. 

Uses: Svedhana is given to those suffering from 
difficult breathing, cough, runny nose, hiccup, 
constipation, or hoarseness. It is used for Vayu or 
Kapha diseases, dma/ toxins, stiffness, heaviness, 
body aches, pain in the waist, ribs, back, abdomen, 
or lower jaw. Svedhana is used for an enlarged 
scrotum, toe or finger contraction, tetanus, sprains, 
or difficult urination. It is used for cancer or benign 
tumors, obstructions of semen or urine flow, obstinate 
Pitta urinary disorders, rigid thighs. 


Although the main pahcha karma practices may 
take only a few days, these preliminary practices 
require 3 days to 3 months to work the toxins to the 
GI tract. 

Once persons feel that heaviness, coldness, pain, 
and stiffness have been removed, they should rest for 
at least 3/4 of an hour before eating or drinking. No 
physical exercise should be done that day. 

Cautions: Heavy application of oils can depress the 
digestive fire and cause digestive disorders (i.e., loss 
of appetite, constipation etc.). Beyond moderate use 
of oil, digestion-promoting herbs are suggested, like 
ginger, fennel, cardamom, or pepper. Further, the 
same effects may be gained by mild, daily oil 
application, and mild sweating herbs like diaphoretics 
and expectorants (e.g., ginger, calamus, cinnamon). 
These methods may be used over a longer time. Even 
if one follows this life regime of oils and sweating, it 
is suggested that one occasionally have a major 
pahcha karma therapy to. This can be done seasonally 
or yearly for to maintain good health. 

Results of excess sweat therapy: Pitta and blood 
excesses, thirst, fainting, weak voice and body, 
giddiness, joint pain, fever, blue, black, or red s kin 
patches, vomiting. To antidote the excesses, astringent 
therapy (i.e., light, cool, dry, bitter, astringent) and 
sweet therapy are used. 

If one only follows the preliminary practices, then 
the toxins return to their site of accumulation, but are 
not removed. This may cause distress or disease as 
toxins can be reabsorbed and return to their site of 
accumulation. 

For Vayu doshas, failure to follow oil and 
sweating with an enema may create a variable 
appetite, gas, distention, constipation, and insomnia. 
Incomplete Pitta practices may cause 











Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 7: Pancha Karma 


irritability, fever, and hyperacidity. For Kapha dosha, 
it may cause loss of appetite, fatigue, or constipation. 


Pancha Karma 


Post Svedhana 

After sudation, persons receive a slow and gentle 
massage followed by a warm water bath (to calm the 
person and to wash off the toxins that have been 
expelled through the skin). A wholesome diet is 
followed thereafter. Exercise and drinking of cold 
water is are avoided on this day. Fresh air, a warm 
bath or shower, and a nap after lunch is advised. 

Pancha karma therapies (see below) are 
begun a set number of days after svedhana, 
Vamana—second day after svedhana 
Virechana—third day after svedhana Basti, 
Nasya, Rakta Moksha—just after 

Pancha Karma (five actions) returns toxins to their 
sites of origin to be properly eliminated. This differs 
from most other healing systems that mainly flush 
the various organs or body systems regardless if the 
toxins are present. Once the toxins are removed from 
the organs and systems, no method exists to remove 
them from the body gently. Thus, many healers tell 
clients that they will feel bad for a few days as they 
detoxify, then they will feel better. With pancha 
karma, the detoxification process happens without 
discomfort or withdrawal symptoms, and the body is 
completely rid of toxins. 


Primary Practices 

(Pradhana 

Karma) 

Pancha kanna consists of five cleansing aspects: 
emesis, purgation, medicated enemas, medicated 
nasal oils, and toxic bloodletting. These therapies are 
employed for acute diseases as well. For example, 
emesis (vomiting therapy) may be used during acute 
asthma attacks, obesity, and acute Kapha disorders. 
As mentioned before, the person needs to be strong 
before undertaking pancha karma because these 
reducing therapies temporarily weaken the system. 

Additionally, pancha karma is used to prevent the 
accumulation of the humors, or as a seasonal health 
maintenance and a longevity/rejuvenation program. 
What is unique about this Ayurvedic approach is that 
it is used not only for healing, but also for prevention 
and rejuvenation (longevity). 

Enemas that include tonics and nutritive herbs are 
also used in supplementation therapy, as they build 
tissues rather than reduce humors. Thus, pancha 
karma offers various therapies that may be used in 
various ways, depending upon the person, disease, 
season, culture, etc. The milder therapies may be used 
seasonally in self-healing, prevention, and 
rejuvenation. 



Therapeutic Vomitng 
(Vamana) 

Of all the five pancha karma therapies, this is the 
most dangerous; one can strain to vomit and damage 
the nerve reflexes. With proper guidance one learns 
the method for oneself or consults a qualified pancha 
karma specialist. It is done regularly to cleanse the 
stomach and remove ama (toxins) and mucus from 
the ndclls (channels) and chest. It is used for relieving 
recent fever, diarrhea, pulmonary TB, and all lung 







The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


conditions, s ki n diseases (e.g., eczema, psoriasis, 
leukoderma), diabetes mellitus, goiter, tumors, cough, 
asthma, and difficult breathing. Vamana is also useful 
for nausea, herpes, head and sinus diseases, allergies, 
chronic colds, rhinitis, rheumatic diseases, arthritis, 
viral disorders (e.g., herpes zoster), insanity, parasites 
(filariasis), bleeding of a downward nature, and excess 
salivation. It helps heal hemorrhoids, anorexia, 
cervical adenitis, edema, epilepsy, confusion, 
abscesses, and sore throats. 

Vamana helps heal obesity, ear discharge, epig¬ 
lottis, uvulitis, stiff neck, acute fever, Kapha fever, 
and nasal discharge. It is also useful for indigestion, 
gastroenteritis, alasaka, poison, chemical bum, and 
diseases due to bad breast milk. When vomiting or 
heart diseases are due to Kapha, then vamana is also 
used (but never when Pitta causes these two dis¬ 
eases—as per the below caution). 


Chardishu bahudoshasu vamanam 
hitamuchyate - Sushrut Samhita. 

Vamana is used with Kapha excesses alone, 
or when Kapha is predominant while being 
associated with Vciyu or with Pitta. 


Precaution: Vamana is not recommended for preg¬ 
nant women, with other Vayu excesses, before 
oleation, when hungry, under constant grief, for chil¬ 
dren, elderly, emaciated, Vayu obesity, wounded, 
heart problems, high blood pressure, and vomiting 
(Pitta or Vayu imbalances). It is not practiced with 
weakness, enlarged spleen or abdomen, blindness, 
intestinal parasites, upward movement of Vayu (re¬ 
verse peristalsis) bleeding, immediately after an en¬ 
ema, loss of speech, urine retention, or abdominal 
tumors. Vamana is not for those having difficulty with 
emesis, with strong digestive fire, hemorrhoids, gid¬ 
diness, enlarged prostate, rib and chest pain, catchexia, 
thrush, fatigue, with excess sex, study or exercise; 
neurasthenia, constipation, helminthiasis, G.I. disor¬ 
ders, prostatitis, aphonia, cataracts, headaches, ear¬ 


ache, eye pain, confusion,neuromuscular disorders, 
deficient emesis, or belching with edema. 

Two types of vamana herbs exist: 

a) Those that induce vomiting (vamaka). They 
are hot (circulating throughout the body, loosening 
and liquefying), sharp (separating qualities), and pen¬ 
etrating (throughout the body). Therapies include 
kutaj, salt water, licorice, and vacha. 

b) Herbs that further help or enhance the induc¬ 
ing herbs (vamanopaga). Herbs include pippall, 
amalakl, rock salt, neem, and madana phal. 

Time : The best time to practice is during the late 
spring or early summer (Kapha- provoking time) and 
close to the full moon when the water element is high, 
one day after snehana and svedhana, after a good 
sleep, after food is digested, or after sumise—6:00 to 
900 or 10:00 a.m. (Kapha time). 

After 7 days of oleation and sweating, the s ki n 
should look shiny, soft, and slightly oily. Feces also 
should look shiny and oily, and increased in quantity. 
The smell of oil should be emanating from the s kin 
and stool. These are indications that persons are ready 


Disease Origin 

Ingredients 

Kapha 

pippall, rock salt, warm 
water 

Pitta 

vasd, neem, pdtola cold 
water 

Kapha/Vayu 

madana phal, milk 

Indigestion 

rock salt 


Method: Two to three days after svedhana (and after 
oleation), the evening before vamana, one eats Kapha- 
increasing foods like sugar, dairy, bananas, sesame 
seeds, and urad dal; causing Kapha excesses that 
make vamana more easily applied. Just before sleep 
persons can take 1/2 to 3/4 gram of vacha to stimu¬ 
late secretions, further increasing stomach volume 

















Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 7: Pancha Karma 


of Kapha. The heating effect of vacha begins to re¬ 
duce the dma and, because heat rises, prepares the 
body for emesis. 

The next morning the stomach remains empty (i.e., 
don’t eat), causing further secretions to de-velop in 
surrounding tissues, promoting secre-tion movement 
to the stomach. After meditation persons undergo mild 
snehana and svedhana, increasing body temperature 
and insuring expan-sion of tissues and subtle 
channels. 

Next one eats li/2cups of a thin, sweet-tasting 
porridge of rice or wheat cooked with milk, salt, and 
a little ghee. The use of Kapha-increasing foods and 
liquids coats the inner membranes and induces the 
need to vomit. After about an hour, one prepares a 
strong emetic tea like licorice, calamus, chamomile, 
or madanphal. This will promote immediate emesis. 
When the tea is properly prepared, persons will not 
feel sick or uncomfortable. The entire process lasts 
about one hour. 


Recipe: The dose is 1 ounce of herbs to 2 cups of 
water. Alternatively, 2 tbs. of salt added to each cup 
of warm water may also be used. A third option is to 
soak madan phal powder in honey overnight and 
make into a paste. The next day 1/2 tsp. is licked with 
the tongue. These methods are emetic—or vomit-pro¬ 
moting. Vamana is not done on a full stomach (after 
eating). Another recipe using madan phal adds 4 parts 
of the herb with vacha (2 parts), rock salt (1 part), 
and is used with raw honey as its vehicle (anupdna). 

If no urge to vomit exists, pippali, amalakl, vacha 
and salt are added to the tea. The proper-ties of honey 
and rock salt liquefy the mucus. In order for vamana 
to proceed easily, persons can drink large quantities 
of licorice tea prepared the night before as a cold 
infusion (soaking the herb in room-temperature 
water). Licorice collects toxins from tissues without 
it being absorbed into the body itself. 

a) Milder liquids include one or two cups of mild 
carminative tea (mint, fennel, etc.—2 tsp. herbs are 
infused into 1 cup of water). Children, the elderly, 
debilitated, impotent, and frightened people drink 
mi lk with raw sugar, honey, and rock salt. The amount 
ingested depends upon the severity of the illness. A 


moderate dose is 23/4 ounces of a decoction, fresh 
juice extract, or infusion; 1 3/4 ounces for powders or 
paste. 

While facing the east, one should recite a prayer 
of health, (e.g., “May Brahma, Daksha, Ashwinis, 
Rudra, Indra, Earth, Moon, Sun, Air, Fire, Sages, 
medicinal plants, and all the crea-tures, protect me. 
May this therapy prove an effective rejuvenative for 
sages, nectar for the gods, and ambrosia for the best 
among ser-pents.”) Then the liquid is drunk. 

b) After drinking mild liquids the person waits 48 
minutes before vomiting. Sitting on a seat parallel to 
the knees (some suggest squatting), one feels the 
reflex, then attempts to vomit. If unable to vomit, the 
person places a spoon or finger in the back of the 
throat (without harming the throat) to stimulate the 
emetic reflex. The head and ribs are supported by 
another person, and the navel and back are massaged 
in an up-ward direction. If excess Kapha exists, then 
Kapha-reducing herbs (e.g., hot or pungent) are also 
drunk. When excess Pitta exists, sweet and cold herbs 
are used. For Kapha/Vayu diseases, salt, oily, and 
sour herbs are used. If Kapha is deficient, emetic herbs 
are used. 

c) One makes sure the stomach is empty from 
vomiting. Once the vomit reflex occurs, it is advised 
to let it proceed all the way. Allowing for a few good 
reflexes is easier than many weak ones. This ensures 
the l ik elihood of not develop-ing side effects. Four, 
six, and eight regurgita-tions define minimum, 
medium, and max im um bouts. Alternately, when the 
mucus and phlegm are released and bile begins to be 
expelled, or until there is a bitter, sour, or pungent 
taste in the mouth, one stops the process. If some of 
the licorice has entered the small intestine, persons 
may experience two or three loose stools over the 
next 12 hours. 

The amount expelled during vamana is meas¬ 
ured by the practitioner to determine proper 








The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


el im ination. For example, if persons drink 2 quarts 
of licorice decoction and expel 3 quarts, this last quart 
is the dma and excess Kapha. The color, consistency, 
and odor are also observed to provide more 
information on the effectiveness of the treatment. 

Persons can follow a long-term emesis alternative 
with the daily use of expectorants like ginger, 
cardamom, and calamus or trikatu. These herbs are 
taken with a mucus/Kapha-reducing diet and lifestyle. 

Additional Decoctions 

1. Triphald may be added to the tea for excess 
salivation, gland disorders, fever, anorexia, and 
abdominal disorders. 

2. Boiled milk is used for internal bleeding in a 
downward direction or burning sensation in the heart 
area. 

3. Yogurt is used for Kapha-vomiting disorders, 
bronchial asthma, and salivation. 

4. Cold yogurt (about 5i/2 ounces) is taken to 
reduce pain in the chest, throat, or heart. 

5. Butter is added for low digestive fire due to 
Kapha or when the body is dry. 

6. Neem, guduchl, bhnhgardj, pippali, chitrak, ginger, 
sesame seeds, and rice flower are used to reduce Pitta 
in a Kapha organ. 

Results/Post Emesis: Outcomes of correctly admin¬ 
istered emesis include calmness, ease, clarity, im¬ 
proved digestion, absence of symptoms of the illness, 
and not too much discomfort. After emesis, persons 
wash hands, face, and feet; and inhale herbal ciga¬ 
rettes. Sleep or rest is very important. After sleeping, 
hands, face, and feet are again washed. If hungry, 
fight food is taken in liquid form (solid food is not 
taken for at least 4 hours when manda or rice water is 
ingested). 

1. Manda: Is drinking only the lukewarm water in 
which white basmati rice is boiled. Some authorities 


suggest that a small amount of ghee and a pinch of 
black salt may be added to manda. 

2. Peyd: The next meal is taken two hours later. Peyd 
is a slightly thicker rice liquid made of 8 parts water 
to 1 part white basmati rice. Rice is cooked until it is 
very soft, thin, light, and porridge-like. (Two or three 
meals of peyd are taken depending upon the degree 
of purification used.) 

Rest is required for the remainder of the day, 
avoidance of speaking, strong emotions (e.g., worry), 
drafts, travel, sex, sun, and suppressing natural urges 
are required. 

For mild purification, only 1 meal of peyd is 
required. 

For moderate purification. 2 meals of peya are 
required. 

For strong purification. 3 consecutive meals of 
peyd are required. Meals are taken only twice daily, 
lunch (noon) and dinner. 

3. Vilepi: After this, vilepl or thick rice soup, is served, 
consisting of 4 parts water to 1 part white basmati 
rice. A little sugar cane powder (e.g., turbinado sugar 
or Sucanat) and a pinch of black salt can be added 
for taste. A small slice of fresh ginger can be sauteed 
with turmeric, cumin, coriander, or fennel in a small 
amount of ghee to build the digestive fire. This is 
taken in the same manner (once, twice, or thrice). 

4. Odana: The next meal is soft, plain basmati rice 
(odana), and vegetable soups. (Some authorities 
suggest omitting the vegetables.) 

5. Yusha: Or rice and split yellow rniing dal soup 
meals are next taken with ghee, rock salt, and sour 
tastes added (some practitioners suggest avoiding 
the sour tastes). This meal begins on the third day 
after vamana 

6. Kichari: Meals include q/ri.s-incrcasing herbs (e.g., 
guduchl, bald, ashwagandhd, shatdvarl), depending 
upon one’s dosha. Kichari starts thin (3 parts water 
to 1 part basmati rice and 1/4 part rniing dal). Next, it 
is prepared thicker using only 2 parts water to 1 part 
rice. 
















Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 7: Pancha Karma 


After this, regular meals are gradually introduced 
as the digestive fire grows stronger. Just as a fire is 
gradually increased from paper and twigs, to sticks, 
and then to logs until there is a strong flame, so then 
is food gradually increased after emesis naturally 
strengthening the digestive fire until it is strongly and 
healthily. The general rule of thumb is to eat only 
when hungry. 

Alternative post -pancha karma or samsara-jana 
diets are listed below. 


Meals 

Food 

1-3 

thin gruel (manda/peya) 

4-6 

moderate gruel (vilepl)-\\tt\e or 
no ghee and salt with the meal. 
Drink warm water after the 
meal until the 
end of the 18 meals. 

7-9 

porridge and thin soup, ghee, 
and salt (yushalodana ) 

10-12 

thicker meal (grain and bean- 
kicharl ), ghee, salt; drink warm 
water after meals 

13 

same, and add a sweet taste to 
the meal 

14 

same, and add a sour taste to 
the meal 

15 

same, and add a salty taste to 
the meal 

16 

same, and add a pungent taste 
to the meal 

17 

same, and add a bitter taste to 
the meal 

18 

same, and add an astringent 
taste to the meal 

resume normal meals 


Post-Strong Dose Purgation Meal Plan 


Day 

11:00 a.m. - Noon 

4:00 - 6:00 p.m. 

1 

vaman 

thin gruel 
( madan ) 

2 

thin gruel Ipeya 

thin gruel/peyu or 
/vilepi 

3 

Moderate gruel /vilepi 
or odana* 

moderate 
gruel tvilepi or 
odana* 

4 

moderate 
gruel /odana* 

mung 

soup /yusha+ 

5 

Mung soup/yusha+ 

mung 

sox\\)lyusha+ 

6 

thicker kichari 

thicker kichari 

7 

thicker kichari 

taste 1-sweet** 

8 

taste-sweet 

taste 2-sour 

9 

taste 3-salty 

taste 4-pungent 

10 

taste 5-bitter 

taste 6-astringent 

11 

normal meals from now on 


*Moderate thickness gruel (vilepi/odana) is taken with little 
or no ghee. Drink warm water after all meals from this point 
until the end of the seven days. 

+ Mung/yusha soup is taken with a little ghee and salt; all 
remaining meals (of the seven days) will include ghee and 
salt. 

** Some say to begin normal meals at this time. 

Inadequate Vamana: If vomiting does not occur, or if 
it is only partially eliminated, symptoms develop such 
as itching, excess expectorating, itching, skin rashes, 
or fever. 

Purgation 

(Virechana) 

This is the simplest method of pancha karma and 
has most easily observed effects. It is an excellent 
method to heal various conditions, including abdomi¬ 
nal tumors, hemorrhoids, smallpox, patches of skin 



































The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


discoloration on the face, jaundice, chronic fevers, 
and enlarged abdomen. Virechana heals poisoning, 
vomiting, spleen diseases, abscesses, blindness, cata¬ 
racts and other eye problems, colon pain, and colitis. 
It further heals vaginal diseases, diseases of the se¬ 
men, intestinal parasites, ulcers, gout, bleeding dis¬ 
eases in the upward direction, blood toxins and dis¬ 
eases, suppression of urine, and obstructed feces. 

Purgatives eliminate excess Pitta from its site in 
the liver, gall bladder, and small intestine (it does not 
deal with the large intestine). The bitter purgatives 
lik e rhubarb, senna, or aloe also clean the liver and 
gall bladder, decongest bile and remove obstructions 
to its flow. They are preferred for Pitta and liver 
disorders (e.g., gall stones). Because this cleansing 
weakens the digestive fire, it is not always 
recommended for Vayu doshas. Kapha doshas, 
however, benefit from this therapy, as they have excess 
bile, congestion, fat, or phlegm. It also helps 
constipation, old fevers, acute diarrhea, dysentery, 
food poisoning, kidney stones, boils, carbuncles, 
excess bile, or toxic blood conditions. 

For those who have not had vamana (emesis), there 
are 3 days of snehapdna, followed by 3 days of body 
oleation and sudation before beginning virechana 
(purgation). If virechana follows a vamana therapy, 
then after the 7 days of proper diet (samsarjana), 2 
days of regular meals are eaten. On the 9th day, 
snehapdna (drinking ghee) is begun for 3 days. The 
following 3 days persons receives oil abhyahga and 
sudation for three additional days. On this 15th day 
(since starting samsarjana) virechana is begun. If 
sudation (sweating) is contraindicated, then virecluina 
begins after the third day of snehapdna (drinking 
ghee). 

Precautions: Virecluina is not recommended for those 
people with recent fevers, poor digestion, bleeding 
diseases of a downward nature (e.g., hemorrhoids), 
ulcers, rectum ulcers, and diar-rhea. Nor is it 
recommended for those who have recently received 
a decoction enema, have hardened feces, suffer from 
TB, and are greatly lubricated. It is not used for the 
very young or very old, the weak, debilitated or 
emaciated, while pregnant, during or immediately 
before menstruation, or with prolapse of the stomach 
or uterus. 


Method: The stool is examined to determine the nature 
of the purgation therapy to be used. Soft stools suggest 
mild virechana (e.g., boiled milk, ghee, honey, and 
cinnamon), while hard stools will require stronger 
purgative herbs (like triphald, castor oil, rhubarb, or 
senna). For Pitta disorders, herbs of astringent, and 
sweet tastes are added. Kapha excesses require 
pungent herbs. Vayu disorders require rock salt, ghee, 
and hot herbs. It is important for persons to undergo 
3 to 7 days of oleation (internal and external) before 
purgation if they haven’t already gone through the 
process for vamana. 


Time: According to Ashtanga Hridayam, the time of 
pupation is after vamana (emesis), and after 9:00 
a.m. (the end of the Kapha time of day). This is done 
with rapidly acting purgatives. Others suggest 
medium to mild doses to be taken just before sleep. 
Still others suggest eating dinner around 7:30 p.m. 
and taking virechana 9:30 p.m., then retiring to bed. 
Some pundits say food should be fully digested while 
others suggest waiting two hours after the meal, until 
food passes out of the small intestine (fasting is 
advised for stronger people). The best season for 
virechana is late spring to early summer. 


Sample Ingredients: A strong purgative like rhubarb 
root (it may produce gripping). A mixture of rhubarb 
(4 parts), fennel, ginger, and licorice (1 part each), 
taken with 2 to 5 grams honey or warm water before 

sleep to prevent gripping). Castor oil is a moderately 
strong purgative (2 tsp. in warm water). Triphald (10 
to 30 grams with warm water, or boiled milk with 
ghee and cinnamon) is a mild purgative. The first 
approach is the strongest and not suggested for 
thosewho are somewhat weakened or of Vayu dosha. 
[The Sushrut Samhitd devotes an entire chapter of 
additional purgatives (Sutrasthdna - Ch. 44).] 









Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 7: Pancha Karma 


Dosha 

Excesses 

Therapeutic 

Purging 

Example 

Purgatives 

Vayu 

hot, salty, 
oily 

triphald, 
jaiphal, 
ishabgol, rock 
salt, ginger 

Pitta 

astringent, 

sweet 

castor oil, 
trivrt, rhubarb, 
katukd 

Kapha 

pungent 

rhubarb, 
senna, trikatu, 
triphald 


Result: The next day (or later that morning), about 
five stools (movements) are passed, flushing toxins 
from the small intestine. The number of stools can 
range from 4 to 15, depending upon the dosha, health 
condition, etc. If one has fewer than 4 stools, the pro¬ 
cess is repeated within a few hours. Stools may be 
loose, but if cramping or griping results, a little medi¬ 
cated ghee can be taken, and cardamom or fennel 
should be added to future purgatives. Traditional stool 
amounts are 30 (maximum or ideal), 20 (moderate), 
and 10 (minimum), or until Kapha is expelled in the 
stool. An example of a quick acting purgative is cas¬ 
tor oil with two times as much triphald. Purgation 
can be done for 2 to 3 days in a row in severe condi¬ 
tions, or 2 to 3 times every other day. If one can sched¬ 
ule this day for a weekend or other calm day, it will 
be more beneficial, practical, and more relaxing. Mild, 
short-term purgation may also be used, as needed. 

Successful purgation: This results in clear minded¬ 
ness, keen senses, stable tissues, strong digestion, 
light, clean, strong, removal of symptoms, and slowed 
aging. 

Abnormal Bouts: These are noted by symptoms of 
abdominal and heart discomfort, anorexia, 
expectorating bile and mucus, itching, burning, s kin 
emptions, rhinitis, gas, and no elimination of stools. 

Excess Bouts: Symptoms include watery stool that 


are white, black, or red in color, rectum prolapses, 
thirst, giddiness, and sunken eyes. 

Follow-up: Purgation is followed by hot spices to 
increase the digestive fire (e.g., ginger, trikatu). They 
are especially useful in the winter or, if the appetite 
does not return to normal, after the therapy. Meals 
are given as described for vamana (emesis) on page 
189. After purgation and before any other purificatory 
therapies, oleation is again given to strengthen the 
person. 

Lack of results: The person eats that day, and purgation 
is given again on the next day. For weaker people or 
those with unlubricated alimentary tracts, oleation and 
sudation are given for 10 days, and then purgation is 
re-administered. 

Exceptions: Vayu doshas, people who exercise 
vigorously, those with a strong digestive fire and those 
with dry alimentary tracts find that purgatives are 
digested before they produce the desired results. For 
these people, an enema (basti) is given first (see 
below). 

Those suffering from trauma, skin problems, 
edema, herpes, jaundice, anemia, poisonous intake, 
and diabetes are given mild oleation, as this alone 
may produce the purging action. 

Post-Virechana: Symptoms of successful virechana 
include feeling lightness in body, calmness of mind 
and in whom gas moves in a downward direction. 
Rice and a lentil dal soup are suggested as restorative 
meals. 


Enema 

(Basti) 

Enema is half of the medicinal therapy, 
or even the complete treatment. 

Charak- Sid. Ch. 1 verse 39 

Basti therapy is primarily used for Vayu 



















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


excesses, either alone, or as the predominant dosha 
deranged. Basti is the Sanskrit name for urinary 
bladder. Originally the bladders of larger animals, like 
buffaloes and goats, were used as enema bags. The 
colon is related to all other organs and tissues, so by 
cleansing and toning the colon, the entire body is 
healed and rejuvenated. The colon is the main organ 
that absorbs nutrients. A healthy, functioning colon 
is imperative for proper assimilation of nutrients. 

Basti is unlike Western enemas or colonics. 
Enemas only cleanse the rectum and sigmoid colon 
(only the lower eight to ten inches of the colon) 
causing an evacuating effect. Colonics remove feces 
blocks but may weaken the mucus membranes and 
dry the colon. This further imbalances Vayu’s normal 
elimination process. Basti, however, treats the entire 
length of the colon from the ileocecal valve to the 
anus. Not only is feces flushed from the system but 
also ama is removed from the tissues. Furthermore, 
balanced and healthy colon function is restored as 
tissues and organs are rebuilt. 

General Benefits: Basti is useful for many disorders 
including chronic constipation, sciatica, lower back 
pain, arthritis, gout, and rheumatism. It also heals 
numerous neurological disorders l ik e Parkinson’s, 
MS, muscular dystrophy, paraplegia, hemiplegia, 
poliomyelitis, osteoporosis, and muscle and nerve 
atrophy. Further, basti helps with mental conditions 
such as Alzheimer’s, epilepsy, mental retardation, and 
sensory disorders. 

General Precautions: Basti is not used for babies, for 
diarrhea, colon cancer, diverticulitis, rectal bleeding, 
polyps, fever, and some forms of diabetes. 

Three types of haslis exist: 

1. Anuvdsana (unctuous)—this enema remains 
in the body for some time without causing harm. 
Mainly herbal medicated oils and ghee are used. The 
amount of oil used in anuvdsana basti is 48 or 96 
grams (1.7 oz. or 3.4 oz.). It is administered through 
the rectum. It is given to all those who are suited for 
niruha (non-unctuous basti), especially those having 
strong digestion, to those not receiving oleation, and 
those with Vayu diseases (only). This form of enema 
is given before niruha. 


This enema moistens dry tissues and organs, 
reduces hyperactive digestion, and Vayu disorders, 
including nervous conditions. It is done in the day 
during the spring and on colder winter days; and in 
the night during the summer, the rainy season, and 
on milder winter days. 


Anuvasana Doses 


Strength 

Basti Dose 

Rock Salt 
& Fennel 

Maximum 

10 oz. 

4.5 gms. 

Moderate 

6.8 oz. 

3 gms. 

Minimum 

3.4 oz. 

1.5 gms. 


The day after basti a warm ginger/coriander 
decoction is drunk to prevent any adverse effects from 
oleation. 


2. Niruha or Asthdpana (non-unctuous)— This 
is a highly beneficial herbal decoction enema mixed 
with milk and a little oil. Niruha is given to those 
with abdominal pain, distention, tumors, gout, splenic 
diseases, diarrhea (without other associated diseases), 
chronic fever, runny nose, obstmcted semen, gas, or 
feces; enlarged scrotum, urinary stones, amenorrhea, 
or severe Vayu disorders. It provides health to the 
healthy and gives strength to the tissues that are weak. 


Strength 

Basti Dose 

Maximum 

33.9 oz. 

Moderate 

27.7 oz. 

Minimum 

20.3 oz. 


Symptoms of proper basti include feeling light¬ 
ness in the body. Two, three, or four niruha bastis 
can be given in a row. 




















Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 7: Pancha Karma 


Basti 

Purpose 

Ingredients 

1st 

to aggravate 
dosha 

rock salt, vachd, 
pippall, licorice 

2nd 

pacify dosha 

licorice, bilwa, kutaj 

3rd 

normalize 

dosha 

licorice, musta, 
prlyahgu, milk 


Simple Niruha Basti 

-1-3/4 cup dashmul herbal decoction -1- 

1/2 oz. sesame oil 

-a little honey 

-a pinch of black salt to increase colon secretions 

3. Uttarabasti —is an upper-tract enema that uses a 
combination of decoction and medicated oils. It is 
delivered through the urethral and vaginal passages 
for the particular problems associated with these 
organs (page 197). 

Precautions: 

Enemas are not given for the following reasons, 
Niruha —This is not used for excess oleation, chest 
injury, severe emaciation, diarrhea with dma (toxins) 
or of a recent onset; vomiting, just after purificatory 
therapies, or just after nasya (nasal oil therapy). It is 
also contraindicated for asthma, coughs, salivation, 
gas, poor digestion, rectal swelling, taken before food 
is digested, or with an enlarged abdomen due to in¬ 
testinal obstructions. This enema should not be used 
when clients suffer from perforated alimentary tracts 
and water, s ki n diseases, diabetes mellitus, or when 
women are in their seventh month of pregnancy. Other 
conditions when niruha is not advised include after 
drinking ghee, with aggravated doshas, when fa¬ 
tigued, hungry, thirsty, overworked, angry, anxious, 
frightened, or drunk. It is also not used when there is 
difficult breathing, hiccup, alasaka, cholera, dysen¬ 
tery, urinary disorders, hemorrhoids, anemia, edema, 
anal inflammation, confusion, anorexia, coma, obe¬ 
sity dry throat, or lung injury. Niruha is not used on 
the very young or very old. 

Anuvasana —This is not for persons unsuited for 


niruha, nor for anemia, jaundice, diabetes, rhinitis, 
fasting, splenic diseases, diarrhea, constipation, and 
an enlarged abdomen from Kapha excesses. It is not 
suggested for those with eye problems, obesity, in¬ 
testinal parasites, gout, goiter, lymphatic TB (swol¬ 
len lymph glands), blood or tissue parasites, or for 
those who have consumed poisons. 

Anuvasana basti can be done the same day as 
niruha. If symptoms persist, a second application can 
be given the 2nd, 3rd, or 5 th day. The second 
anuvasana can be stronger if stool is not passed within 
48 hours. 

Quantity: 

Birth until 2 years old. 48 grams (@1.7 oz.) of 
liquid are used. [For emergency cases only] 

2 to 13 years old, each successive year it should be 
increased by 48 grams (until it reaches 576 grams 
or about 20 oz.). 

13 to 18 years old, each successive year by 96 grams/ 
@ 3.4 oz. (until it reaches 1,152 grams or 
approximately 41 oz.). 

18 + years old. 960 grams (@34 oz.) are used. 

The amount of oil used is 1/4 that of a decoc¬ 
tion, according to each age group. 


Herbs 


Vayu 

cedar, licorice, vacha, bilwa, 
shatavari, ashwagandha 

Pitta 

licorice, bilwa, shatavari 

Kapha 

cedar, vacha, bilwa, 
ashwagandha 


Method: After oleation (snehana), sudation 
(svedhana), (and if necessary) emesis (vamana), and 
purgation ( virechana); after elimination, on an empty 
stomach, after performing prayers; considering one’s 
dosha, the proper herbs, the practitioner, and having 
other basti experts present, basti (enema) is given. If 
a person is strong and is so suited, an oil enema is 
given first. [According to the Ashtanga Hridayam, 
from September through March, enemas are given 
during the afternoon. In the remaining months, bastis 

























The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


are administered in the evening. Some suggest it be 
always given in daytime. Regarding time of year, 
some suggest basil during the late summer or early 
fall]. Charak says non-unctuous enemas can be given 
during the day in the winter and spring, and in the 
evening during the remainder of the year. 

1. An oil massage (abhyanga) and bath are given, 
followed by an easily digestible meal (1/4 less the 
usual quantity). Afterwards, they drink a liquid then 
take a walk. Meditation or prayers are performed as 
well. Next the person evacuates stool and urine and 
then lies on a comfortable bed, neither too high nor 
low ( Charak adds, on white sheets with head facing 
the East). They lie on their left side, with the left leg 
extended and the right leg bent (knee close to chest) 
for easier administration. A lubricated nozzle is 
inserted into the rectum, approximately six inches, 
after the air has been expelled from the enema bag. 
Fluids are slowly released into the colon. Some liquid 
is left in the bag to prevent air from passing into the 
rectum. Different herbs are made into a decoction to 
be used in the basti with the oil. 


Symptoms 

Basti Herbs 

legs, thigh, shoulder, 
neck 

vidarl kand, 
guduchl, haritakl, 
ginger 

sciatica, urinary 
problems, hunchback 

guggul, shatdvan 

Pitta diseases 

vdsdk, katukd, 
mahjishtha 

Kapha diseases 

triphala, neem 


If stool, urine, or gas blocks the basti flow, a 
smaller dose is given to ensure the oil enters into the 
body (and not just the water). 

2. After the basti is administered and the nozzle 
is removed, the person lies on their back while the 
practitioner gently hits the person’s buttock several 
times. The person then slightly raises the heels and 
buttocks and gently pounds against the bed. Next, 
the foot of the bed is raised 


three times, followed by extending both legs. A pil¬ 
low is then placed under the legs, and the person re¬ 
ceives an oil massage, working out any painful or 
knotted spots. This helps the enema to stay in longer 
(if the enema is soon expelled, another oil enema is 
immediately given). 

3. Niruha or water-based basti is held in the body 
for about 48 minutes. Anuvasana or oil basti must 
remain in the body for 9 hours. Should the elimina¬ 
tion reflex cause early release of the fluids, they are 
reapplied. 

If, after anuvasana, the person has regained a 
strong digestive fire, they can eat a light meal in the 
evening. If the oil does not come out due to the ex¬ 
cessive dryness inside the body, and the person feels 
good, it can remain inside overnight. It is expelled in 
the morning by drinking warm water. If it does not 
come out after 24 hours, the person is administered 
an herbal (fruit) rectal suppository or strong decoc¬ 
tion enema. Signs of proper administration of enema 
include feeling relief from the toxins, and finding the 
oil being expelled along with the feces, followed by 
gas. 

4. Basti is repeated on the 3rd or 5th day, or until 
the fat is well digested. Those with excessive dry¬ 
ness, or who exercise daily and have good digestion, 
receive daily oil enemas. 

5. When the body becomes well lubricated, a 
purificatory decoction enema is given to clear the 
channels (srotas) 3 or 5 days after the unctuous en¬ 
ema (Sushrut suggests the same day). It is given in 
the afternoon, after the person digests a light meal, 
and after oleation, sudation, elimination of feces, 
urine, and meditation. The strength of the decoction 
depends on the strength of the client. 

After receiving an oil enema, a decoction en¬ 
ema is given to restore balance between toning and 
reducing. This balances all three doshas. Oil enemas 
are given after a span of three days so as not to im¬ 
pair the digestion. For extreme Vayu excesses and 
dryness, oil enemas may be given daily. 















Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 7: Pancha Karma 


Dosha 

Enemas 

Basti Herbs 

Vayu 

9-11 

dashmul, bald, 
punarnava, bilwa, 
guduchl, shatdvarl 

Pitta 

5-7 

sandalwood, 
mahjishtha, musta 

Kapha 

1-3 

rock salt, vachd, 
bilwa, pippall 


Oil is used for unctuous enemas. 
Pitta doshas may use ghee. 


Results of Nine Bastis 

An ideal therapy consists of a series of nine 
enemas. 

1st permeates the inguinal and pelvic region with 
demulcent properties 

2nd restores Vayu in the cephalic part of the head 
3rd improves body strength and complexion 
4th permeates the plasma (rasa) 

5th permeates the blood (rakta) 

6th permeates the muscles/flesh (mamsa) 

7th permeates the fat (medas) 

8th permeates the bones (asthi) 

9th permeates the marrow (majja) 

This series is repeated twice; 
once without oil, once with oil. 

Non-unctuous (niruha ) enemas promote longevity, 
intelligence, voice, complexion, and draw out feces, 
mucus, bile, and urine. Unctuous (oil) enemas (used 
after non-oil enemas) help the complexion, strength, 
Vayu, mental clarity, energy, and weight. After oil 
enemas, fasting is advised for the rest of the day. Oil 
enemas are best for conditions of the head, heart, 
bladder, and Vayu excesses. Pain, numbness, and 
swelling may develop when Vayu is obstructed by 
fat or Kapha. For these situations, unctuous enemas 
are not advised as they will aggravate the fat and 
Kapha conditions. 

The number of enemas suggested are traditional, 
but in today’s fast-paced life, it may not be practical 
or necessary for persons to take so many enemas. 

it* 


Readers and practitioners are advised to use intuition 
and evaluate the results even one or two enemas 
produce before possibly forcing more sessions. Just 
as the dose of herbs has been found to be much less 
in the west than in India, so too vamana, virechana, 
and hash may need to be applied in moderation. 

Post-Enema Precautions: It is always best to stay on 
a wholesome diet, but if this is not possible, persons 
should eat properly for at least double the length of 
the basti therapy. For example, if one undergoes a 
nine-day basti program, healthy foods should be eaten 
for at least 18 days immediately afterwards. Other¬ 
wise, persons may feel worse than they did before 
they began the basti therapy. 

After basti one is also advised to avoid excesses 
of any kind, such as prolonged sitting, standing, 
speaking, travel, naps, coition, cold, sun, grief, wrath, 
and suppression of natural urges. 

If too much oil has been administered during basti 
and excess pressure exists, one may experience 
aversion to food, an oily or greasy complexion, an 
oily smell in the mouth, coughing, difficult breathing, 
and dull senses. Also, each person may develop 
symptoms specific to their dosha. 

Vayu— astringent taste in mouth, yawning, 
shivering, limb pain, Vayu discharges, vishamsa fever 
(i.e., malaria, viral fever, or fever due to injury). 

Pitta—fever, burning, thirst, perspiration, 
pungent taste; yellowish complexion, urine, and eyes. 

Kapha—water brash, sweet taste in mouth, 
heaviness, vomiting, difficult breathing, mucus, fever, 
food aversion. 

Receiving inadequate or cold enemas (either dry 
or oily) without proper pre-cleansing can produce 
scanty stools, cramps, heaviness, distended intestines, 
or constipation. 

Enemas after a heavy meal cause cramps, a heavy 
stomach, no release of gas, heart problems, bad taste 
or food aversion. If oleation, sudation, proper diet, 
and elimination of stool have not been done properly, 
one may experience heavy limbs, colic, abdominal 
distention, difficult breathing, or heavy intestines. 















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Decoction Enema 
(Niruha Dravya Kalpana) 

Preparation: (The recipe in Ashtanga Hridayam 
Su.; Ch 19, verse 38 i/ 2-40, is as follows), 


• 960 grams (34 oz.) of the herbs appropriate for 
ones dosha (constitution) are made into a decoction. 

• [Herbs are boiled with 16 parts water 
(approximately 4.2 gallons over a low flame) until 1/ 
4 of the water remains (about a one-gallon decoction). 

• Next oil or ghee is added to the decoction, in 
the amount of 1/4 of the decoction for Vayu, 1/6 
quantity for Pitta, and 1/8 quantity for Kapha. 

• 1/8 quantity of medicated paste is sometimes 
added, making the decoction neither too watery nor 
too thick. 

• Lastly, 48 grams (@1.8 oz.) of raw sugar cane 
(jaggery) or molasses is added, along with similar 
doses of honey and salt, depending upon the dosha]. 


Author, Vaghbhata, notes other views: 


• Oil and honey are each 144 grams (5.1 oz.), 

• Salt for the strong person is 12 grams, 

(.42 of an ounce) medicinal paste is 96 grams (3.4 oz.). 

• All other liquids are 480 grams (17 oz.). 


Further, Charak offers a breakdown similar to 
the Ashtanga formula for oil enemas: 


• 1 year old 40 grams (@ 1.5 oz.). 

• 2 to 12 years old—each year an additional 
40 grams is added. 

• 12 to 18 years old—80 grams (@3 oz.) are 
added each year until it reaches 960 grams (@ 34 oz). 

• 18 to 70 years old— 960 grams. 

70 H— 800 grams (@28 oz.). 


The order of mixing ingredients is honey, salt, oil 
(or ghee), paste, and decoction. The ingredients are 
well mixed and mildly warmed before being 
administered to the person. 

The flow of the enema should be moderate (i.e., 
not too forceful). After receiving the enema, the 
person lies on their back with a pillow 


under their head, concentrating on the enema. When 
the elimination urge presents itself, they should squat 
on their heels to expel the enema and wastes. If the 
enema should stay in for 48 minutes, it becomes criti¬ 
cal to expel it. Various substances, including oils, al¬ 
kalis, hot and sour properties, are immediately given. 
Alternatively, an herbal (from fmit) suppository is 
given, along with sudation and—even frightening the 
person, so as to expel the enema. 

Decoctions may be given several times until the 
person feels relief from the toxins. Once they are 
feeling better they take a warm bath to remove any 
lingering complications due to the enemas. Food 
consists of rice and soothing herbal teas with ghee. If 
the enema increases Vayu, an oil enema is 
immediately given. 

Charak suggests, that once the enema is expelled, 
the person should be sprinkled with cool water and 
given boiled rice. Later in the evening, after the earlier 
meal is digested, the person eats a small and easily 
digestible meal. Then an oil enema is given to restore 
bulk. 

Herbs used in decoctions by Charak include 
guduchl, gokshura, sandalwood, triphald, dashmul, 
bilwa, vachci, musta, pippall, also jaggery, honey, 
ghee, oil, and rock salt. 


Sample Decoction Basti 

Calamus, ginger, fennel, 1-2 tsp. rock salt, and up 
to 1/2 cup sesame oil, per quart of decoction. Licorice, 
other demulcents, or oil is used because the enema 
may be too drying or depleting. Cleansing enemas 
are followed with an oil enema (1/2 cup sesame oil 
in 1/2 cup warm water). This balances all three 
doshas. 

Helps: Chronic constipation, colitis, arthritis, epilepsy, 
paralysis, anxiety, neurosis, insomnia, sciatica, lower 
back pain, kidney disorders, neuralgia, and Vayu dis¬ 
orders. 

Note: Vamana, virechana, and basti are not given 
to people before age 10 or after age 70. 














Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 7: Pancha Karma 


Urethral Basti (Douche) 

For complications of urine, genital tract pain, 
prolapsed uterus, urine retention or incontinence, 
menorrhagia, and during the menstrual cycle, douches 
are advised. During menstruation the uterus is not 
covered; therefore, it receives unction very easily. This 
allows for easy release of Vayu. 

After a meal (with ghee), passing stool, urine, and 
after bathing, a person sits comfortably on a straight, 
soft, knee-high seat. The catheter is introduced gently 
into the orifice, neither too deep nor too shallow. The 
nozzle is greased with ghee and 20 grams (.7 of an 
ounce) of a decoction and is inserted into the body. 
As the decoction is expelled, the process is repeated 
another two times. If the third decoction is not 
released, it is all right. Decoction herbs include 
pippali, black salt, apdmdrga, mustard, nirgundl, and 
cane sugar. The same procedures, restrictions, 
complications, and signs of proper application of 
unctuous enemas apply to douching. 

For women, the catheter is 10 finger-widths long. 
It is inserted into the genital tract up to four finger- 
widths deep. In the urethra, it is inserted up to about 
two fingers deep. The catheter is easily inserted while 
the woman lies on her back, with legs fully flexed. 
Douche is given 2 to 4 times over the course of 24 
hours. After the douche, a somewhat thicker 
suppository is inserted. This therapy continues for 3 
days, with the dose gradually increased. After a 3- 
day rest, the procedure is repeated. 


Nasal Therapy 
or Snuff (Nasya) 

Ayurveda suggests that the nose is the gateway to 
the head. Thus, nasal herb therapy is used for healing 
diseases of the throat, neck, head, and senses (e.g., 
ears, nose, eyes, etc.). Nasya is also used for toning 
and strengthening these areas. 

Nasya is useful in relieving stiffness in the head, 
neck arteries, throat, and jaw obstructions, coryza, 
uvulitis, tonsillitis, cornea, vision and eyelid disorders, 
migraines, disorders of the neck, shoulders, ears, nose, 
mouth, head, cranium, and scapula. It helps facial 
paralysis, convulsions, goiter, pain, tingling sensation, 
loose teeth, tumors, hoarse voice, speech disorders, 


and Vayu disorders of the mind, head, neck, and 
throat. Nasya is also helpful in head diseases caused 
by Kapha (e.g., stiffness, numbness, heaviness). 
Saturating nasyas are recommended for Vayu 
disorders (e.g., facial paralysis, trembling head). 
Pacifying nasyas are useful for internal bleeding and 
other Pitta head and neck disorders. 

Snuff is suggested three times daily in the rainy, 
autumn, and spring seasons when there are no clouds 
in the sky. Snuff is said to improve vision, smell, and 
hearing; keep hair from graying and falling out; 
prevent stiff neck, headache, and lockjaw. It is also 
said that snuff relieves chronic rhinitis, and head 
tumors. The veins, joints, ligaments, and tendons of 
the skull gain greater strength. The face becomes 
cheerful and well developed; the voice becomes more 
melodious. (See Charak: Su. Chapter 5; verse 56-62 
and Sushrut: Chapter 50 for further information.) 

Nasya herbs include bald, vidahga, bilwa and 
musta. They are made into an oil decoction with 
various other ingredients. 

Three kinds of nasyas exist: 

1. Virechana (purgatives)—for headaches, eye 
problems, throat problems, swellings, enlarged 
glands, parasites, tumors, skin diseases, epilepsy, 
rhinitis, and loss of head movement. Ingredients 
include the appropriate oil, herbal powders, pastes, 
or decoctions; and are mixed with honey and salt. 

Virechana is of two types: avapida (fresh herb 
juices) and pradhamana (blowing of herb powders 
through a tube). For formula, see below. 







The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Ingredient 

Dose 

pungent herb (e.g., pippali) 

3 gms. 

hingu 

31.25 mgs. 

rock salt 

750 mgs. 

milk, water, or decoction 

24 gms. 

sweet: raw honey, or sugar 

12 gms. 


2. Brimhana (nourishers)—for Vayu headaches, 
migraines, loss of voice, dry nose and mouth; 
difficulty speaking, opening eyes, or moving the arms. 
Medicated oils help with premature graying and hair 
loss; ringing in ears, neck, shoulder, and arm 
disorders; dental problems, and headache on either 
side of the head. It is also highly beneficial for 
degenerative brain disorders such as Alzheimer’s, MS, 
epilepsy, and mental retardation. Ingredients include 
medicated ghee and extracts from plants. 

3. Shanmna (palliatives)—for discolored patches 
on the face, blue patches on the s ki n and for hair and 
eye diseases. Ingredients include medicated ghee, 
milk, or water. 

There are two general methods to administer 
ncisyas: powder form (blown through a tube); and 
liquid drops (4, 6, 8 drops—minimum, moderate, 
maximum). Traditional powder quantities are 6 
grams, but even 1/2 gm. may be effective for 
Westerners. The tub length is 6 ahguli long (6 finger 
widths). 

Five forms of nasya are used: snuffing, pressing, 
blowing, smoking, and smearing. Two categories of 
snuff exist: uncting and evacuating. Also, 2 types of 
pressing are available: evacuating (shiro virechcina) 
and retaining (nasya). Blowing of powders into the 
nose cleans the body channels (srotas). Smoking has 
3 categories: pacifying, evacuating, and saturating. 
Smearing promotes both evacuating and pacifying 
results. The two most effective methods are powder 
(inhaled through a tube) and liquid drops (4, 6, 8 
drops—minimum, moderate, maximum). 



Nasya 


Snuff 

Press 

Blow 

Smoke 

Smear 

unct 

retain 

cleanse 

saturate 





pacify 

pacify 

evacuat¬ 

ing 

evacua¬ 

ting 


evacuat¬ 

ing 

evacuat¬ 

ing 


Snuff—uncting (nasya) and evacuation (shiro 
virechana) are the most effective forms of nasya. 
Snuff is subdivided into five categories, as shown in 
the chart above. 

1) Uncting ( Snelui): Oil increases deficient oily matter 
of the brain, reduces feelings of void or emptiness, 
tones nerves and muscles in the neck, shoulders, and 
chest. It improves eyesight, balding, premature 
graying, loose teeth, earaches, cataracts, dry mouth, 
nose disorders, loss of voice, Vayu-head disorders, 
and wrinkles. Vayu- and Pitta-reducing herbs are 
used. Four, 6, or 8 drops constitute the minimum, 
moderate, and maximum doses. Other sources 
suggest using only 3 drops. 

2) Evacuating (Shiro-virechana): Powders of pippali, 
vidahga, apdmarga, or any oil mixed with these herbs, 
is used to reduce Kapha and mucus in the throat, 
palate, or head. This procedure helps with food 
aversion, headache, heavy head, cold, coryza, 
hemicrania (headache on one side of the head), 
edema, skin disorders, epilepsy, laryngitis, worms, 
and hysteric convulsions. Four, 6, or 8 drops are the 
minimum, moderate, and maximum doses. 

3) Pratiniarsha: This is also an uncting procedure in 
which oil is dropped into the nose and expelled 
through the mouth. Sushrut says, 1 to 3 drops, or 
whatever amount it takes for the oil to move through 
the nose and reach the mouth. Sushrut also suggests 
that oil be used for Vayu and Kapha closhas, and ghee 
be used for Pitta doshas. However, any medicated 
Pitta-reducing oil is also suggested by other writers 

























Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 7: Pancha Karma 


(e.g., brahmi oil). Pratimarsha is useful for those who 
are wounded, emaciated, children, and the elderly; 
and at all times and seasons (including rainy weather). 
It strengthens the senses, helps prevent premature 
graying and hair loss, thirst, head and mouth diseases, 
and all disorders above the shoulders. 

4) Avaplcla: This is an evacuative procedure. Fresh 
pungent herbal juice is dropped into the nose. Then 
the nostrils are pressed with both palms. Four, six, or 
eight drops constitute the minimum, moderate, and 
maximum doses. This method helps with tridoshic 
fevers, throat disorders, excess sleep, parasites, and 
mental disorders (including epilepsy and insanity). 
Some ingredients, for example, are licorice, black 
pepper, vacha, and rock salt, made into a liquid with 
warm water. 

5) Praclhama: This is another evacuative method. 
Here, evacuating six gms. of herbal powders are 
blown into the nostrils through a tube six ahguli (six 
finger widths). It is useful for those with extreme 
dosha imbalances (e.g., unconsciousness). 
Ingredients include rock salt and trikatu. 



NASYA 

Precautions: It is not advised to take nasya when 
thirsty, after a meal or a fast, just before or after 
bathing, with acute rhinitis, the last few months of 
pregnancy, during menstruation, just after asthma 


attacks or with difficult breathing, colds or coughing. 
Nasya is also not used just after oleation, emesis, 
purgation, basti, after sex or drinking too much water 
or alcohol; on sun-less days, with acute coryza, anger, 
grief, fatigue, when excited or suppressing natural 
urges. Further, it is not used during bad weather or 
for children under 7 years old, and the elderly over 
80 years of age. 

Pratimarsha is not used after wine, when weak, 
with head-worms, and when doshas are greatly 
excessed and move around. 


Time: Nasyas are taken before meals. Kapha dosha 
take these nasyas in the morning, Pittas in the 
afternoon, and Vayu doshas in the evening or night. 
Healthy persons take snuff in the morning in the 
summer, afternoons in the winter and rainy seasons 
(when it is not cloudy). Snuff is not taken during the 
early rainy season, fall, and spring, except during 
emergencies. Then, it is taken in the morning. 

Nasya is taken daily, both morning and evening, 
for Vayu head disorders, hiccup, tetanus, convulsions, 
sti ff neck, and for a hoarse voice. For all other diseases 
it is taken only once daily for 7 days. 

Method: Nasya is taken after elimination of stool and 
urine, brushing teeth, smoking herbs and receiving 
oleation (oil massage) to the neck, cheeks, and 
forehead. The palms are first rubbed together until 
warm and then placed over the face (as fomentation). 
Alternatively, a warm wash cloth may be placed over 
the sinuses. This process begins to loosen toxins and 
expand the channels for easier toxin elimination. 

Next, the persons lie on their backs on a bed in a 
room with no drafts. Feet are slightly raised and the 
head is slightly lowered. The limbs are extended. 

Nasya oil is slightly warmed and then inserted into 
the nostrils, (right nostril first), while the other nostril 
is kept closed. Oil is sniffed up into the head. To better 
achieve this effect, nostrils may be closed with the 
fingers while inhaling through the nose begins. Then 
fingers are released, causing a sudden rush of air into 
the nostrils. This process can be done five to ten times. 

Afterwards, the soles, neck, palms, ears, and face 
are fomented again with warm palms, and gently 











The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


massaged. Turning to the side, persons spit out any 
oil that may have reached the mouth and throat. This 
procedure is taken two to three times. Should fainting 
occur, cold water is sprinkled over the body (but not 
the head). After a purgative nasya, a medicated oil 
nasya is administered (according to one’s dosha). 
Persons lie on their backs for about two minutes, 
inhale smoke from various herbs, then gargle with 
tepid water several times to cleanse the throat from 
the nasya. 


Nasya 

Small 

Medium 

Large 

Snuff 

8/8 

16/16 

32/32 

Evacuative 

4/4 

6/6 

8/8 

Pratimarsha 

2/2 

2/2 

2/2 


In the above chart, Sushrut suggests the number 


of drops applied in each nostril, for small, moderate, 
and high nasya doses. 


Results of effective nasya include feeling light¬ 
ness in the head, clear passages, easing of the origi¬ 
nal symptoms, clear mind and senses. If nasya has 
been done in excess, dry foods are eaten to restore 
balance. If nasya has been insufficient, ghee is taken. 

For more serious health concerns, the process is 
followed for 7 days. After a few days rest, the pro¬ 
cess can again be repeated for 14 days. After a few 
days rest, nasya is again give for 21 days. 

Suggested times for therapeutic administration 
are shown below. 


Dosha 

Nasya Time 

Vayu 

3:00 - 6:00 a.m./p.m. 

Pitta 

Noon and/ormidnight 

Kapha 

6:00 - 9:00 a.m./p.m 


Remedies 

Disorders 

Sweets (e.g., honey raw sugar, shatdvari ), 
medicated oils 

neck, shoulders, anus, dry mouth, ear ringing, Vayu and Pitta 
excesses, premature gray hair, balding, fright, females, children, 
weak persons, head, nose, eyes, migraines, teeth, hemicrania 

Pungent herbs 

above shoulder diseases, loss of voice, anorexia, cold, headache, 
chronic rhinitis, edema, epilepsy, skin disorders 

Avapicla (fresh pungent herb juice) 

throat, toxic/tridoshic fever, excess sleep, remittent fever, mental 
disorders, parasites 

Pradamana (e.g., rock salt, vachd, black 
pepper, ginger, 

serious disorders (e.g., unconsciousness) 

Cane sugar, pippall, black salt, ginger 

eye, ear, nose, head, neck, lower throat, jaw, shoulders and back 

diseases 

Vachd, black pepper, black salt 

insanity, epilepsy, severe (tridoshic) fevers, tetanus 


Results: Generally, all nasyas promote clarity, sharp senses, and improved sleep patterns. 
The use of purgatives includes relief of eye strain and tension, clean mouth, and clear voice. 

























Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 7: Pancha Karma 


Results of Pratimarsha Nasya 


Time of Use 

Benefits 

upon waking in the morning 

removes waxy mucus in the nose, cheerful mind 

after brushing teeth 

sweet aroma, taste, firm teeth 

before leaving home 

safeguards from smoke, dust, pollution 

after exercise, coition, travel 

removes fatigue 

after stool/urine 

removes dull/heavy vision 

after gargling, eye salve 

invigorates the eyes 

on an empty stomach 

cleans/lightens inner channels 

after emesis 

cleans mucus in ducts, stimulates appetite 


Specific Therapies 

The Shangadhara Samhita outlines therapies for 
specific health concerns and their doses. Virechana, 
or evacuative nasya, is divided into two kinds, avaplda 
(fresh pungent herb extract juice) and pradhamana 
(blowing pungent herbal powders in the nose). 

Ingredients: Various cleansing herbs are used as 
snuffs, decoctions, oils, ghee, and smoking to heal 
the nasal passageways and head. Herbs used are 
calamus, cloves, gotu kola, bayberry, sage, and basil. 
Nasya works directly on the prana and brain, and it 
is good for all doshas, though smoking may aggravate 
Vayu or Pitta. It is useful in helping the sinuses by 
using expectorant herbs, including vasdk, ginger, and 
black pepper. 

Sinuses and brain: Gotu kola or calamus oil, or 
ghee are used. 

Nasal passages: Cloves, calamus, and bayberry 
are smoked. 

Doshas: 

Vayu persons take nutritional nasyas. Pitta/ 

Vayu persons use herbal sedatives. 

Nasal massage is also suggested to release 


emotions that can be stored in the nose. 

Kapha doshas use calamus or gotu kola to 
relieve headaches, heavy or lethargic heads, colds, 
running noses, sticky eyes, hoarseness, sinusitis, 
tumors, epilepsy, chronic rhinitis, attachment, greed, 
and lust. 

Nutritional Nasya: For Vayu dosha. Ghee, oils, 
or salt are used for migraines, dry voice or nose, 
nervousness, anxiety, fear, dizziness, emptiness, 
negativity, stiff neck, dry sinuses, or loss of sense of 
smell. 

Sedative Nasya: For Pitta dosha. Use aloe vera 
juice, warm milk, ashwagandha, or gotu kola juice/ 
oil; for hair loss, conjunctivitis, or ringing in the ear. 

Oil Nasya: For all doshas. Decoctions and oils 
together are used. 

Complications: Symptoms of inadequate nasya 
include deranged senses and dryness. As an antidote 
to this, nasya is repeated using the proper amounts. 
Excess, deficient, cold, hot, or sudden nasya may 
cause thirst, belching, and aggravation of the 
condition. 

Nasal Massage: Pinky fingers are dipped into the 
oil needed and gently inserted into the nostrils (one 
at a time) as deep as comfortably possible. The 
passage becomes lubricated through a gentle massage. 






















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


This relaxes the deeper tissues and can be done every 
day or whenever under stress. First the massage is 
done clockwise, then counter-clockwise. 


Blood-letting 
(Rakta MokSha) 

(Therapeutic toxic blood-letting) involves 
releasing toxic blood from various body sites, 
although mainly from the back. At first, blood should 
be dark or purplish. When it turns bright red, therapy 
is complete. Two to 8 ounces is the general amount 
of blood released. Sometimes various sensitive sites 
require only a prick to relieve problems. For example, 
at the eyebrow a prick relieves headaches, and eye 
inflammation. This process is no longer used in India 
as often as it once was. In some countries a 
professional license is required in order to practice 
this therapy. Blood-letting is useful when wishing for 
immediate results with Pitta disorders such as skin, 
liver, spleen, and conditions like gout, headaches, and 
hypertension. Fate summer through early fall is the 
best time for this procedure. 

Precautions: Rakta moksha is not used on babies, the 
elderly, during pregnancy or menstruation, or with 
anemia, edema, leukemia, bleeding, or cirrhosis. 


Smoke Inhalation Therapy 
Dhuma 

Daily use of smoke inhalation is used for cough, 
asthma, chronic rhinitis, voice disorders, bad smell 
in the nose or mouth, pallor, hair disorders, mucus, 
itching, and pain. It is also used for loss of hearing, 
taste, or sight; stupor, hiccup, heavy head, head or 
neck pain, hemicrania, earache, eye pain, throat or 
jaw spasm, weak teeth or toothache, ear, eye, or nose 
discharges, worms, sneezing, fatigue, dull intellect, 
Vayu or Kapha diseases, and excess sleep. 


hative, purificatory, or purgative. 


Strength 

Herbs 

Mild 

(lubricate) 

guggul, musta, bilwa, 
cardamom, madana phal, 
saffron, sesame oil, and 
ghee 

Medium 

(palliative) 

utpala, licorice, kushta, 
aromatics 

Strong 

(purgative) 

frankincense, vachd, 
dashmul, triphala 


Others suggest two medicated smokes, and one 
oil smoke daily. The result is the cleansing of the heart, 
throat, senses, lightness of the head, and pacifying of 
the doshas. For calming the mind, sandalwood, 
jatamanshi, etc. are useful. 

Mild (lubricating) herbs are inhaled after 
sneezing, yawning, defecation, urination, copulation, 
surgery, laughing, and brushing teeth. It is done once 
a day. Ingredients include guggul, musta, sesame, and 
ghee. 

Medium (palliative) herbs are inhaled at the end 
of the night, after meals, and after nasya therapy. 
Inhalation is done only once a day. Herbs include 
licorice and (naturally) perfumed scents. 

Strong (purgatives) are used upon waking from 
sleep, after nasya, washing eyes, bathing, and 
vomiting. Smoke is inhaled four times daily. Herbs 
used include triphala, vachd (calamus), and 
fran ki ncense. 


Vayu doshas use lubricating smoke (snigdha), 
Vayu/Kapha doshas use medium or madhya smoke, 
and Kapha constitutions use tikshna or strong smoke 
therapies. Tik e other therapeutics discussed, the cat¬ 
egories of smoke fall into the categories of mild, pal- 















Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 7: Pancha Karma 


6 Forms of Dhuma 


Brimhana (toning) 


Rechana (purgative) 


Kasaghna (cough-reducing) 


Vamana (emetic) 


Vranadhupan (ulcer fumigation) 

/ 

Shamana (palliative) 


Time: The procedure is to take 3 puffs 3 times. Some 
authorities suggest smoking 8 times during the day 
for Vayu and Kapha excesses, after bathing, meals, 
vomiting, sneezing, brushing teeth, after snuff, eye- 
salve application, and sleep. 

Others suggest two medicated smokes and one oil 
smoke daily. The result is the cleansing of the heart, 
throat, senses, lightness of the head, and pacifying of 
the doshas. 

Precautions: Smoke inhalation is not recommended 
for people who have bleeding disorders, have 
completed purgation therapy (virechana), or enema 
(basti); or who suffer from enlarged abdomen, 
diabetes, blindness, Vayu moving upward (e.g., 
belching), flatulence, or have just eaten fish, wine, 
yogurt, milk, honey, ghee, or oils, or have ingested 
poison, or have head injuries, anemia, and insomnia. 
Smoking at improper times results in bleeding 
disorders, blindness, deafness, thirst, fainting, 
delusions, and intoxication (they are countered by 
cold). Exhalation through the nose causes loss of 
vision; exhale only through the mouth. 

Herbal smoke inhalation is not given until 18 years 
of age (some say after age 12). [Mouth gargle begins 
at age five]. 

Excess/Untimely Smoking: Symptoms include deaf¬ 
ness, blindness, dumbness, vertigo, internal hemor¬ 


rhaging. Antidotes include using ghee snuff, and eye 
salve. Cooling herbs are used for blood disorders. 
Rough herbs are used for Kapha and Pitta disorders 
(e.g., cardamom, kut, black pepper). 

Preparation of Smoke Wick: A reed, 12 finger-widths 
in length, is soaked in water for 24 hours, then 
wrapped in 5 layers of cloth and smeared with a thin 
paste of the appropriate herbs. The herbs are left to 
dry; then the reed and cloth are removed. Ghee or 
sesame oil is added to the herbs. Then, herbs are in¬ 
serted into a pipe, and lit. Others suggest that the tube 
be in 3 pieces, one fitting snugly into the other, and 
that the inner tube be the thickness of the pinky fin¬ 
ger. For coughs, powdered herbs are placed on hot 
coals, and a tube is used to inhale the smoke. 

Pipe lengths vary. For evacuative purposes it is 24 
finger-width long (ahguli). For oil, it is 32 ahguli. 
Regular therapies require 36 ahguli. The pipe is 
straight, having three filters near the mouth, ending 
with a nozzle. Tube thickness is as wide as the little 
finger. Excess smoking may cause dryness and heat 
in the head and throat, fainting, thirst, bleeding, 
giddiness, and poor sense functioning. 

Specific lengths of smoking tubes are assigned 
for the three types of herbs, and methods of soaking 
reeds (wicks). 

Method: The person sits erect. 

Slight congestion (movement): With the mouth 
open, as smoke is inhaled through the nose, alternating 
nostrils (one nostril open, the other closed). Inhalation 
is through the nose, exhalation is through the mouth. 
This is repeated three times. 

Clogged (non-moving): Inhaled through the 
mouth (to decongest or create movement). Exhale 
through the mouth. 

Throat congestion: First inhale through the nose, 
then later through the mouth. Exhale through the 
mouth. 


The therapy used determines the reed length 
(see table below). 

Xk 
















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Ahguli 

Therapy 

Herbs 

40 

palliative 

cardamom 

32 

nourishing 

ghee , oil 

24 

scraping, 

cleansing 

evacuates 

16 

cough 

suppressing 

black pepper 

12 

emetics 

vacha, neem 

* 

ulcers 

appropriate 

herbs 


* the tube needs to reach the ulcer 


A length of two ahguli (finger widths) must be 
left free. Paste is applied to the end of the nozzle and 
smoked. 


i 3 ) < 

WICK 

Signs of effective dhuma include clarity of the 
senses, speech and mind; strong teeth, and a pleasant 
odor in the mouth. 


2. It is important to resume or establish a diet and 
lifestyle that is harmonious with one’s constitution. 
If a person returns to old, bad habits, they may worsen 
their condition by suppressing the renewed healing 
energies. The toxins may then directly enter cleansed 
tissues and go deeper than before, causing severe 
diseases. During convalescence, persons avoid loud 
talking, bumpy rides, long walks, excessive sitting, 
and eating, if experiencing indigestion. 

To avoid aggravating the humors, persons also avoid 
eating unwholesome food, day naps, and sexual 
relations. If any of these harmful experiences are 
followed, follow-up toning and rejuvenation 
processes are used to counteract the ill effects. 

3. Once therapy is successful or complete, the next 
step is rebuilding the tissues damaged by the disease, 
giving them a new level of strength and purity. Oil or 
ghee is first taken with gradual reintroduction of the 
six tastes. First, sour, sweet, and delicious tastes are 
taken. Then one takes sour and salty tastes. Next bitter 
and sweet tastes are introduced. These dual tastes are 
used in these combinations to make food delicious. 
Lastly, astringent and pungent ones are taken in small 
quantities as a hygienic measure to clean the mouth 
and s lim iness. Rebuilding the healthy cells and tissues 
is known as rejuvenation, and is the basis of the 
Ayurvedic approach to longevity. Deeper tissue 
rejuvenation is most important because this is the 
source of the body’s energy or life-sap (ojas). Herbs 
that increase ojas for each dhcitu (tissue) layer are 
included in the chart at the top of the next page. 
Brahml rasayana, a mixture of gotu kola, ghee, and 
other herbs is an important rejuvenative. 


Follow-up Practices to Pancha Karma 
(Uttara Karma) 

1. Pancha karma is sometimes repeated, for it may 
take several times to cleanse deeply seated toxins. 
This is especially true when following short term 
methods. Also, it may be repeated after 1 to 3 months. 
Pancha karma is recommended at least once a year. 


Organs and Herbs 

Herbs and foods can be used specifically to rebuild 
tissue layers, and herbs can also have a direct 
rejuvenative effect on the various body organs and 
tissue layers. (See lower chart on next page). 


Life-Sap (Ojas) Increasing Herbs 

To prevent future illness and develop a general 

sense of well-being or balance, rejuvenation may 

v. 


















Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 7: Pancha Karma 


Organ-Building Herbs 

Organs 

Herbs 

Lungs 

bibhltakl 

Heart 

cinnamon, draksha, ginseng, hawthorn berries, lotus seeds, rose, 
sandalwood, saffron 

Stomach 

licorice, marshmallow, shatavari, varnsha lochana 

Small Intestine 

cardamom, cinnamon, draksha, fennel, galangal, ginger 

Liver 

aloe gel (with turmeric), dandelion root, mahjishtha 

Spleen 

astragalus, bald, ginseng, licorice 

Colon 

triphald 

Kidney 

fo-ti, gokshura, brahmi, shildjit 

Brain 

calamus, brahmi, harltaki, jatdmdnshi, shafikh pushpl 

Uterus 

aloe vera gel, kapikachhu, saffron, shatavari 

Testes 

kapikachhu, bald, black musali 


Dhatu - Building Herbs 


Plasma 

Blood 

Muscle 

Fat 

Bone 

Marrow 

Semen 

comfrey 

root 

amalakl 

amalakl 

ghee 

comfrey 

root 

ghee 

fo-ti 

marsh¬ 

mallow 

chyavan 

prash 

ashwa- 

gandha 

ashwa- 

gandha 

ashwa- 

gandhci 

ashwa- 

gandha 

ashwa- 

gandha 

irish 

moss 

ghee 

bala 

bala 

guggul 

brahmi 

saw 

palmetto 

slippery 

elm 

saffron 

milk 

ginseng 

sesame 

oil 

solomon’s 

seal 

haritaki 

lotus 

seeds 

shatavari 

shatavari 


shatavari 

shatavari 

sandalwood 

shatavari 


turmeric 



myrrh 

licorice 

bala 

































The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


become a part of a person’s lifestyle. One should 
sense of taste. The next few chapters describe also 
follow an appropriate nutritional food plan 
therapies of touch (abhyanga), the senses of (see 
Appendix 3). Ayurveda offers rejuvenative 


therapies that achieve balance through each of the 
five senses. Herbs and foods harmonize the sense 
of taste. The next few chapters describe therapies 
of touch (abhyanga), the senses of smell (aromas), 
sight, (colors), and sound (mantras and music). 




#irfo^an.ic.a/ 57 U-ilLIlA. 







Section 3: Therapies 


Abhyanga/Marmas 


Chapter 7: Pancha Karma 


Oil Application (Abhyanga) 

Other aspects of pancha karma include shim 
dhara (hot oil poured on the head), meridian 
cleansing, abhyanga (pouring oil on the body), and 
marma balancing (applying oil on sensitive points). 
Because every practitioner has their own style of this 
traditional therapy, both traditional and modern 
approaches will be discussed. 


History 

More than 2,000 years ago in India, oils were found 
that not only healed illness, but also prevented future 
imbalances. These therapies were traditionally given 
(to oneself or to others) on a daily basis. Oil was 
poured onto the entire body (also called abhyanga), 
head (.shim bhyanga and shiro dhcirci), ears (karna 
purana), feet (pada bhyanga), or specific sites that 
required attention (marma bhyanga). 


Lymphatic System: One important benefit from 
abhyanga is the stimulation of the lymphatic system. 
The lymph system is pervasive throughout the body, 
except in the brain, bone marrow, and deep skeletal 
muscle (though some scientists believe they may 
extend there as well). The role of this system is to 
carry nutrients to and remove toxins from the cells. 
Some cells in the nodes destroy bacteria, viruses, and 
other potential harmful particles. Other vessels send 
fresh fluids from the other side of the node to the 
heart. 

Lymph contains about half the concentration of 
proteins in the plasma, and returns the serum proteins 
to the blood. Thus, this is a sort of self-feeding, 
system that means the body prepares its own food 
and feeds itself. Additionally, it contains many white 
blood cells that help maintain the body’s resistance 
to immune disorders, forming these infection-fighting 
cells in the nodes. 

This system contains various amino acids. One 
amino acid called tryptophan is needed for producing 
energy and balancing the hormonal and nervous 


systems. Melatonin a brain hormone synthesized from 
tryptophan within the pineal gland, is believed to be 
related to the thyroid, adrenals, and gonads. It has 
been found to help calm excess mental activity. 
Dopamine beta hydroxylase, is an enzyme believed 
to be related to schizophrenia and other mental 
disorders. Histaminase, another enzyme, breaks down 
histamine. If histamine is in excess, it may cause 
gastric acidity, lethargy, itching, headaches, pain in 
muscles and nodes; and allergies. Thus, abhyanga 
may help the body produce its own natural 
antihistamines. Lymphs also play a role in the various 
forms of edema. 

The lymph system is Kapha in nature. 
Shleshaka Kapha is a mixture of lymph and synovial 
fluid found in the joints and also runs through the 
nervous system. Lymph provides the nerves with 
receiving and transmitting signals. It also helps 
develop antibodies that are important for the immune 
system. 

By rubbing the joints in a circular motion, 
circulation is enhanced and rubbing the joints in a 
circular motion secretes fluid secreted from the lymph 
nodes. This causes more protein, glucose, minerals 
oxygen, and antibodies, involved with the lymphatic 
system, to circulate in the blood. 


Benefits of Abhyanga: 

The Ashtanga Hridayam, one of the triad of the 
classical Ayurvedic texts, suggests abhyanga be given 
on a daily basis to prevent and heal illness. Many 
benefits arise from daily abhyanga. Let us look at 
each benefit individually. 

1. Reverses/prevents aging and increases 
longevity 

2. Removes fatigue and stress from work and 
fife overall 

3. Heals and prevents nervous system disorders 

4. Promotes good vision 

5. Nourishes the body and promotes sturdiness 

6. Remedies insomnia 

7. Creates an electrochemical balance in the 
body. 

8. Oil rubbed into the skin prevents dehydration 









The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


and strengthens the nerves. 

9. Oil helps the electromagnetic field of the body. 

10. Stimulates antibody production, thus 

strengthening the immune system. 

Aging (Jam) is a natural process of the body, and 
surely death is one of fife’s certainties. Nevertheless, 
the diseases caused in the aging process are removed 
through abhyanga. Symptoms of aging include gray 
hair and wrinkles; loss of sleep, teeth, impairment of 
sight and hearing; weakened digestion and 
elimination; and brittle bones (osteoporosis, arthritis, 
weakened spine, calcification, stiffness, etc.). Other 
signs of aging include pains, giddiness, Par ki nson’s 
disease, heart, artery, and blood pressure problems; 
decreased mental function (memory, concentration, 
etc.), and diseases of the various organs. Through 
daily abhyanga fife is maintained and people can five 
a normal life span (longevity or Ayush). 

Method: Sesame, mustard, or almond oil, applied 
to the spine, head, and feet, remove effects of old age 
and increase longevity. 

Fatigue (Shrama) results from hard work, stress, 
poor diet, lack of exercise, not protecting oneself from 
the environment, etc. These habits weaken the 
muscles, nerves, and joints. Abhyanga provides a 
passive exercise, cleanses stress from the muscles, 
removes toxins from the organs, cells, tissues, and 
blood; and tones the muscles and nerves. 

Method: Rubbing, patting, squeezing of muscles. 

Add sandalwood oil to the oil mixture. 

For fatigue caused by straining muscles add a 
pinch of salt to warm water and soak the limb. 

Adding a heating oil such as mint, eucalyptus, or 
mustard helps fatigue due to toxin accumulation. 

Nervous disorders (Vayu Roga) occur due to 
excess air (Vayu), which is the element that regulates 
sensory-motor skills. It is also the most important 
element because it regulates the other two doshas 
(Pitta regulates the metabolism and enzyme and 
digestive functioning. Kapha regulates the body 
organs). So, balancing Vayu is necessary; daily 
abhyanga achieves this balance. 


Method: Mahanarayan oil removes air imbalances 
that aggravate the nervous system. 


Eye (Drishti) sight is weakened by poor fighting, 
poor posture, reading print that is too small, 
excessive television, gazing at overly bright or 
flashing fights, (e.g., the sun, neon, and flashing 
signs), receiving excess sun, heat, or cold to the 
head; excess eating and drinking of pungent and 
oily foods. Additionally, old age causes 
impairments such as cataracts, near- and 
farsightedness, night blindness, optic nerve 
problems, etc. Poor or improper diet creates an 
inflamed or detached retina, atrophy of the optic 
nerve, etc. Ayurveda also believes that constipation 
causes various eye problems. Again, abhyanga 
heals these impairments and corrects the visual 
problems associated with the aging process. 

Method: Attending the spine, neck, head, and 
feet. Before bed 

a) massage the navel clockwise using sesame 
or coconut oil. 

b) foot massage, including pressing between 
the big and index toes. 

Other helpful measures for the eyes include 
staring at a candle flame (at eye level), 
massaging the temples, using a neti pot, 
massaging the nostrils with ghee, ingesting 
triphala each morning, washing the eyes with 
ghee. 

Nourishing (Pushti) the tissues (dhatus, i.e., 
plasma, blood, muscle, fat, bones, nerves/marrow, 
reproductive fluid), are affected by poor eating habits, 
digestion, and metabolic functioning. The result is 
that foods are not digested and properly eliminated. 
Undigested foods become toxic waste in the body 
( ama) and hamper the natural absorption of nutrients. 
Through abhyanga wastes are loosened, flow to their 
sites of elimination, and are expelled as urine, feces, 
and sweat. 

Method: Rubbing, pressing, kneading. \ 















Section 3: Therapies 


Abhyanga/Marmas 


Chapter 7: Pancha Karma 


Sturdiness (Dardhya) Stress, trauma, shocks, and 
accidents diminish the body’s sturdiness. The inabil¬ 
ity to overcome these blows to the system results in 
many diseases and impairments, abhyanga relieves 
these problems, allowing persons to recover and heal, 
and prevents further weakening of their system. For 
those who are physically incapacitated abhyanga 
provides a passive form of exercise. 

Method: Rubbing, pressing, kneading. 

Sleep (Swapna) or rest is needed to recover from 
the mental, physical, and emotional activities of the 
day. Persons deprived of sleeping and dreaming de¬ 
velop physical and mental diseases. Some people 
sleep too much, some sleep too little. Sleeping pills, 
caffeine, etc. are artificial attempts to balance one’s 
unhealthy sleeping habits. Bad foods, overeating, 
drugs, overwork, worry, anger, lethargy, fear, etc. cre¬ 
ate these situations of insomnia and oversleeping. 
Abhyanga removes toxins, calms the nerves, brings 
the body and mind back into balance with nature, 
and helps the person naturally adjust to daily rhythms. 

Method: Rubbing of oils to the feet and tense ar¬ 
eas before bed. 


Abhyanga and the Doshas: 

Besides removing general aging problems, 
abhyanga provides specific benefits for people of 
different constitutions. 

Vavu doshas tend towards excess dryness, both 
on the skin (including wrinkles) and internally. They 
may develop nerve and bone disorders, constipation, 
anxiety, and weak immune disorders. Oil application 
restores moisture to the skin, soothes the nerves, 
strengthens the bones, and nourishes the tissues. Some 
authorities suggest abhyanga against the direction of 
the hair to open the pores, then reversing the direction. 
Others suggest abhyanga only in the direction the 
hair grows. Sesame oil is blended with general Vayu- 
reducing herbs and essential oils or herbs and oils for 
a specific health condition. 


Pitta constitutions generally have heat excesses 
such as s ki n rashes, ulcers, infections, eye, heart, and 
blood disorders; impatience, and hot temper. Applying 
oils that are sweet and cooling brings balance, and 
also heals and prevents further occurrence of these 
situations. Sesame oil is blended with general Pitta- 
reducing herbs and essential oils or herbs and oils for 
healing a specific condition. 

Kapha people retain an excess of water, and tend 
to suffer from symptoms such as weight retention, 
edema, mucus, lung and sinus congestion; and 
sluggish minds. Warm oils help remove the excessive 
amounts of water and restore balance. Ashtanga 
Hridayam also mentions the applying of fragrant 
powders to reduce Kapha, liquefy fat, promote 
compactness strength of the body parts; and create 
good skin tone. Sesame, mustard, or canola oil is 
blended with general Kapha-reducing herbs and 
essential oils, or herbs and oils for specific health 
conditions. 


Pressure during abhyanga varies according to one’s 
dosha. Vayu people need a light, gentle touch. Pitta 
doshas prefer a moderate touch. Kapha constitutions 
enjoy deep muscle abhyanga. Further, a slow, pres¬ 
sure is applied around the waist with slightly more 
pressure exerted around the face and neck. The head 
and feet receive even more pressure, and more time 
is spent on these two areas. Soft, less fleshy, and less 
muscular areas are also gently pressed (e.g., navel 
region, temples, heart, and ribs). 


Abhyanga Time: 

Daily abhyanga is done 1 to 2 hours after eating, 
preferably yoga or exercise (until persons break a 
sweat) is practiced after abhyanga. It is best to wait 
at least 1 hour after abhyanga before taking a bath to 
let the oil nourish and detoxify all the tissue layers. 
The oil also keeps the body and s ki n flexible. Oil is 
applied at room temperature in the summer and 
warmed in the winter. Herbal decoctions and essential 
oils, according to one’s dosha, may be added to the 
oils. 

















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Sesame oil (i.e., unscented), when used by itself, 
is best applied on Mondays, Wednesdays, and 
Saturdays, for auspiciousness, wealth, and longevity. 
Abhyanga with unscented oil or without herbal oil is 
not recommended on the lunar days, 3, 6, 8, 10, 11, 
13, 14 (i.e., counting from the first day of the new 
moon to the full moon. It is also not recommended 
on the same days from the full moon to the new 
moon). Infants and elderly may receive care on all 
days. 

All days are favorable for abhyanga when 
the base oil is mixed with essential 
flower oils, herbal plants, or using 
mustard oil (for Kapha dosha). 

Abhyanga is not given immediately after enemas, 
emesis, or purgation therapy; during the first stages 
of a fever, or with indigestion. It should also not be 
given to persons with excess Kapha (dma or toxic) 
disorders, such as obesity, unless the oils or powders 
are specific to reduce dma and Kapha. 

One unique advantage of medicated oil abhyanga 
is that their healing properties are absorbed into the 
system within two minutes. It nurtures all seven tissue 
elements in less than 14minutes. Ingesting herbs takes 
a longer time because they pass through the digestive 
system. 

Specific Abhyanga Therapies: 

Besides the general benefits of healing difficult 
diseases and promoting longevity, each special 
abhyanga method offers unique therapeutic proper¬ 
ties. Some of the approaches offer both traditional 
and modem uses. Traditional methods are used 
along with pahcha karma practices. Modem 
approaches are generally from India’s Kerala state. 
These modalities can be used for healing by 
themselves; there is no need for emesis, purgation, 
and enemas. 

Pressure: Two views on abhyanga pressure 
exist: According to dosha and according to guna 
(quality). As mentioned above, a person can receive 
abhyanga with light, moderate, or deep touch, 
depending on whether they are Vayu, Pitta, or 


Kapha doshas, respectively. A second option is to 
apply pressure according to how much purity 
(sattwa), heat/energy (rajas), and grounding 
(tamas) one needs. For example, if a person is 
experiencing mild imbalances (e.g., the start of a 
cold), then a gentle, sattwic touch is used. If a 
moderate imbalance exists (e.g., a full-blown cold) 
then more heat and energy (rajas) is used. Lastly, if 
the imbalance is great (e.g., chronic bronchitis), 
then an even deeper pressure (tamasic) must be 
exerted. 

Another dimension is also considered. If a person 
is experiencing a Vayu (air) excess (e.g., constipation), 
then moderate, warming ( rajas); and deep, grounding 
(tamas) pressures may be used. Likewise, if one’s 
imbalance is too grounded (i.e., excess Kapha/ 
overweight) then moderate and light touches energize 
and enlighten the overly grounded imbalance. Lastly, 
if there is too much of the rajasic (heat) imbalance 
(e.g., skin rash), then cool (mild/ sattwic) and moist 
(deep /tamasic) pressure is exerted. The practitioner 
chooses the most comfortable and balancing methods 
for each client. 

Yet another view suggests that for serious 
disorders like high blood pressure, light abhyanga 
(done only with the fingers from the middle of the 
chest out to the sides), or no abhyanga at all is to be 
done over the chest. Persons with low blood pressure 
receive only foot abhyanga. Abhyanga is not advised 
for fevers or s ki n diseases. Abhyanga is avoided over 
troubled areas such as stomach diseases or bone 
injuries. 

Ayurveda suggests that abhyanga be given and 
received by members of the same gender. This allows 
for a better exchange of energy. Of course, family 
members will enjoy giving and receiving abhyanga 
to each other. This develops a greater bonding 
experience. 









Section 3: Therapies 


Abhyanga/Marmas 


Chapter 7: Pancha Karma 


One or Two-Person Abhyanga 

One very popular Ayurvedic abhyanga is done 
with two practitioners. As one person works one arm 
(leg, head, or torso side), the second person works 
with the corresponding body part, with identical 
movements and pressure. Apart from receiving a har¬ 
monious or balancing session, the feeling is most plea¬ 
surable and pampering. Traditional abhyanga in¬ 
volves six people, four to give the abhyanga, one to 
keep the oil warm (and supply the practitioner with 
fresh warm oil) and one to supervise. The person re¬ 
ceives abhyanga in seven positions for approximately 
15 minutes per position. 


Abhyanga Sequence 

1. Sitting 

2. Lie on Back 

3. Lie on Left Side 

4. Lie on Right Side 

5. Lie on Right 

6. Sitting Again 

7. Lie on Back Again 


As with all Ayurvedic abhyanga, the main em¬ 
phasis is on feeding the s ki n rather than on massage 
techniques. Oil penetrates the skin, all the tissues are 
fed, and the toxins contained within the tissues are 
released. Oil takes five minutes to permeate the s kin 
completely. Then it spreads through the seven clhatus 
(tissues). Oil moves through each dhatu in less than 
two minutes (100 seconds). 

The method suggested below describes a gen¬ 
eral overview. For every practitioner differences in 
style will exist. As abhyanga is practiced on family 
members and clients, persons will slowly develop 
their own style. 

Two-person abhyanga uses approximately 1 1/4 
cups of oil (appropriate to one’s constitution). One 
method of abhyanga suggests a time schedule last¬ 
ing approximately five minutes per set of body parts 


(i.e., both arms, shoulders, neck, torso, back, legs, 
and feet). This lasts about a 45 minutes. 

Various techniques, such as rubbing, sliding, 
kneading, etc., may be employed. Joints are massaged 
in a circular motion. Generally, the hands follow the 
contour of the body. One view suggests massaging 
only in the direction of the hair. Another belief 
considers massaging in the direction that the blood 
flows. The key factor is that one practitioner 
determines the style, speed, and pressure, while the 
second practitioner mirrors these movements and 
amount of pressure. 

When oil is applied and rubbed in, toxins are 
dislodged from the tissues and returned to the blood 
system. Certain abhyanga strokes match the 
movement of the five Vayus. 

1. Strokes that begin at the head and move to the 
navel remove excess Prana Vayu and improve the 
senses. 

2. Strokes that start at the navel and end at the head 
remove excess Udcina Vayu, carbon dioxide, mucus, 
and saliva. 

3. Clockwise strokes around the navel balance 
Samcina Vayu, improving digestion, metabolism, the 
small intestine, and liver. 

4. Strokes that move from the heart to the 
periphery and back balance Vyana Vayu, improving 
blood circulation and the lymphatic system. 

5. Moving the hands from the navel to the anus 
and urethra balances Apdna Vayu, improving 
discharge of urine, feces, and menstrual fluid; and 
improving parturition in women. 

Alternative Abhyanga Sequence 

1. Strokes begin from navel, moving to head 

2. Strokes return from head to navel 

3. Strokes move from navel to feet 

4. Strokes return from feet to navel 

(the process is repeated three times: on the 
front, back, and sides of the body) 


Steam therapy is employed immediately after 
abhyanga to sweat the toxins out through the s ki n. 


1 iis 




















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


The remaining toxins flow back to their sites of 
origin in the GI tract (stomach, small intestine, 
colon). From these sites the toxins are removed 
from the body through the various panclui karma 
therapies discussed earlier in this chapter. 

One needs to be very careful and gentle when 
working the temples, heart, and spine. It is also 
important not to get oil in the client’s eyes. 

For healthy persons abhyanga begins at the feet 
and ends at the head. Some suggest that, for high 
blood pressure, abhyanga be done on the head for 20 
minutes. Points 11 and 12 in the Head Abhyanga 
diagram [part 2 on page 214] reduce high blood 
pressure, along with gently rubbing up and down the 
sides of the neck. It is useful to place a cool towel on 
the head and heart during abhyanga. If any person’s 
pulse is 100 beats or more per minute, no abhyanga 
is given at all. 


A third school of thought suggests moving from 
the soles of the feet and working toward the heart to 
move impure blood to the heart for better functioning. 


3rd Alternative Abhyanga Sequence 

feet 

prone 

legs 

prone 

arms 

prone 

chest 

prone 

abdomen 

prone 

back 

prone 

hips 

prone 

head 

sitting 

neck 

sitting 

face 

sitting 


Ayurvedic Abhyanga Techniques 

Following one’s intuition during abhyanga is 
important; notice whether the client is comfortable. 


The person giving the abhyanga also needs to be 
comfortable, neither bending too low nor raising their 
arms too high. If abhyanga is done on the floor, then 
one should feel comfortable squatting or sitting in 
siddhasana/siddha yoni asana position. After the 
abhyanga, both people should feel recharged. 

Oil should not be cold when applied to the 
person’s skin, or it will shock them, preventing 
relaxation. Also, the practitioner’s hands should not 
be cold. Rubbing the hands together will bring warmth 
and healing energy. Working the muscles relaxes and 
tones them, while working the bones strengthens the 
skeletal system. 

Techniques: Tapping, kneading, rubbing, squeez¬ 
ing. 

Tapping is first introduced to inform the body it is 
about to receive abhyanga. It increases circulation 
and strengthens muscles. Tapping is done with open 
palms and relaxed fingers. 

Kneading is done as if kneading dough. It increases 
the energy flow, relaxes, removes stress, and 
rejuvenates the body. 

Rubbing is best done with oils according to one’s 
dosha (only Kaphas can have a dry abhyanga); 
otherwise, dry mbbing creates friction and aggravates 
Vayu. Gentle rubbing is more relaxing, whereas 
vigorous rubbing creates passive exercise. Oil rubbed 
under the joints works the lymph system. Circular 
motion on specific points {mannas —discussed later) 
releases growth hormones. Comfortable pressure is 
always be applied during abhyanga. Creating a 
rhythm is another important part of the rubbing 
technique. 

Squeezing is the fourth phase in this abhyanga 
process. Both hands are used to squeeze all the areas 
that were rubbed using comfortable pressure. Cross 
movements are also employed. Hands slide in the 
opposite directions). Pressing special points (mannas) 
is also advised. Applying oil to the fingernails is the 
final stage in this process. Fingers are squeezed one 
at a time; this ensures that the oil seeps into the cracks 
between the nail and the cuticle. g&L 




















Section 3: Therapies 


Abhyanga/Marmas 


Chapter 7: Pancha Karma 


Some authorities suggest that healthy persons can 
receive the circular portion of the abhyanga both 
clockwise and counterclockwise, while persons with 
an illness can receive only clockwise abhyanga. 

Post Abhyanga: When the session is complete it 
is advised that both practitioner and client lie in the 
corpse clsana pose (Chapter 9) and rest for some time. 
Sadhana (meditation) is recommended. Aum, the 
Gdyatri mantra, personal mantra, or prayer may be 
used. 


Abhyanga Length: Depends upon the health and 
age of the person. 


Age 

Abhyanga Time 

6 days - 6 months 

15 minutes 

Infants (until 3 yrs.) 

15-20 minutes 

3-18 years 

30 - 45 minutes 

18-40 years 

40 - 45 minutes 

40 + years 

according to health 

People with diseases 

15-20 minutes 


Lymph: Working the areas where lymph glands 
exist will cleanse and stimulate this system. Circular 
motion all around joints stimulates the lymph. 

Pregnant Women: Abhyanga is applied very 
carefully and gently. Traditionally, abhyanga was 
received on a daily basis during pregnancy. It was 
found that proper abhyanga would result in a painless 
delivery. 

Post Partum: Traditional Ayurvedic care suggested 
that the woman who had just given birth would receive 
abhyanga for the next 40 days, while she rested. This 
abhyanga would help return the body to its normal 
size. Although this is not usually possible in today’s 
world, it is advised the new mother should receive 
abhyanga as frequently as possible. 

New Bom: Six days after birth, the baby would 
receive traditional Ayurvedic abhyanga when they 
were bathed. A dough ball of whole wheat flour was 
made (tennis ball size), mixed with sesame oil 
(mustard in the winter), and gently rubbed across the 
baby’s body. This cleansed and strengthened the child. 

Described below is a head abhyanga discussed in 
Ancient Indian Massage, by Harish Johari. 


The hand contains all healing qualities; gentle touch brings wholeness. - Rig Veda 


Head Abhyanga 

pour oil at point 1 (optionally point 2 also) 
spread with fingers only (not palms) 


8 finger widths 
above eyebrow: 



cowlick (gently turn hair 
in both directions) 


pour oil here 

where neck 
and skull meet 


1. Pour oil; then massage to both sides of head. 

2. Twist cowlick; pour oil and massage into both sides of head. 

3. Bend head forward and pour oil at this point and massage 

into back of head. 

4. Next, press from point three and move hands and fingers up 

the head to the forehead and back again. 





















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Head Abhyanga - [part 2] 



5. Gently pound the top-middle of head from back to front, 
and back again. This stimulates the circulatory and 

nervous system's capillaries. 

6. Twist and gently pull the hair in all three spots (see 
diagram 1) to increase the flow of the cerebral spinal fluid. 

7. Press and rub forehead from the middle to the sides to 
improve alertness, memory and balance of the pituitary 
and pineal glands. 

8. RubUtkshepa marma counterclockwise to balance 
the eyes, lungs, and heart. 

9. Gently rub the temples Sthapani marma) counterclock¬ 
wise to improve the colon, intestines and balance Vayu. 

10. Rub behind the ear (clockwise) to balance the intes¬ 
tines, colon and brain. 

11. Gently press at the junction of the neck and head to 
balance the nervous system, promote stability and lower 
high blood pressure. 


12. Rub the Vidhura marma behind the earlobe (clockwise) to lower hight blood pressure. 

13. Rub finger tips along the top middle of the head (back and forth, pressing the skull (#5 line). 

14. Twist and pull the hair in the three places, starting at the base of the scull and ending 
with the point eightarigula above the forehead (see diagram 1). 



over the eyebrows, eyelids, nose and chin. Then move towards the jaws and 
up, in front of the ears. 

2. Press along the sides of the head, behind the ears, to the lower back of the 
head. Then twist and gently pull the hair (see arrow #2). 

3. 4. Follow the arrows in the picture, twisting and pulling the hair where shown. 
5. Gently clap over the top of the head. 











Section 3: Therapies 


Abhyanga/Marmas 


Chapter 7: Pancha Karma 


Abhyanga 


Movements are down, 

(i.e., in the direction the 
hair grows), and following 
the contours of the body. 

Circles are made 
around joints. 



Follow the 
contours 
on the back 


Circle around shoulder, 
elbow, wrist, knee, and 
ankle joints. 


Chest may 
follow circular 
pattern in the 
direction of the 
hair. 



Another technique 
is to massage from the 
inner arm to the leg—down, 
and from the outer hand 
and foot—up (in the 
direction of the blood 
flow). 


[Hands may 
move up lightly, 
but pressure is 
applied in the 
downward 
direction] 


Marina Abhyanga 

Another form of abhyanga is the use of the major 
and minor manna points. Manna is discussed in one 
of the four main Vedas, and also detailed in the 
classical Ayurvedic text, Sushrut Samhita. The 
manna points are similar to Chinese acupuncture, 
only no invasive use of needles is involved. 

Manna points are positions on the body where 
flesh, veins, arteries, tendons, bones, and joints meet. 
They may be seen as the junctions where Vayu, Pitta, 
and Kapha meet; where sattwa, rajas, and lamas 
meet; or where eternity and relativity meet. Some 
say they are also the points where the three aspects 
of Self-realization meet, i.e., inner Self, outer world, 
and between the two (knower, known, and process 
of knowing). They may also be the junctions between 
the physical, astral, and causal bodies. In short, they 
are points that have great importance to a person’s 
body, mind, and spirit. 


Although the mannas are the junctions of all five 
principles (i.e., flesh, veins, arteries, tendons, bones, 
and joints), at each point a predominance of one 
principle exists. It is at these points where abhyanga 
can most effectively restructure or rebalance the 
system to function most healthily. Further, abhyanga 
helps develop the preventive health and longevity of 
the body and mind by ensuring the proper balance 
and flow of hormones, fluids, immune factors, etc. 

One hundred seven manna points exist on the body. 
This makes it much easier to remember and work 
with, compared with the thousands of points in 
Chinese acupuncture. Ayurveda details major ( rnahd) 
and minor manna points. The major points 
correspond to the major chakras (secret energy points) 
on the body, while the minor points are found around 
the torso and limbs. Thus, healing through manna 
abhyanga affects the chakras, physical health, and 
the doshas. 





















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


The purpose of a marma abhyanga is to stimulate 
the various bodily organs and systems. Like 
acupuncture, these points are measured by finger units 
(anguli or cingula) to detect their correct locations. 
Many marma points are larger than acupuncture 
points. Thus, they can be found more easily. 

One school of thought suggests that mannas are 
not so much points as they are circular bands around 
certain parts of the body. For example, a manna exists 
just above the knee (the width of the client’s four 
fingers above the middle of the knee), known as Ani 
Manna. This manna relates to the small intestine. It 
is also situated on the back of the leg, directly behind 
this spot. If one were to move the hands from the 
front Am' Manna, in a straight line to the back (i.e., 
by working the sides of the leg that are in line with 
Ani Manna) this manna would also be stimulated. 
So when one works a manna point, they can affect 
the front, sides, and back of a manna (i.e., encircling 
the area around the arm or leg). 

In ancient India, it was cautioned that these 


manna points were to be guarded from harm. If these 
points were pierced by arrows or hit forcefully, it could 
result in disease, trauma or even death. Obviously, 
places like the heart, forehead, and throat are vulner¬ 
able areas, whereas sites on the arms and legs are 
less vulnerable to severe injury. When imbalances 
exist in the body, these same spots become sore. 
Through manna abhyanga health is restored. 

Manna points are grouped according to the region 
of the body (arms [22 points] and legs [22 points] 11 
per limb), abdomen [3 points], chest [9 points], back 
[14 points], and head and neck [37 points]). They are 
also grouped according to muscles [10 points], 
tendons/ligaments [23 points], arteries [9 points], 
veins [37], joints [20 points], and bones [8]. (Some 
group these points slightly differently.) 

Traditionally, manna points are grouped into three 
categories: those on the legs and feet (Shankha 
Marma), those on the trunk (Madhayamahga 
Marma), and those on the neck and head (Jatrurdhva 
Manna). 



dxrlx* «x. 


tea 










Section 3: Therapies 


Abhyanga/Marmas 


Chapter 7: Pancha Karma 


Marma Points 


Utkshepa 
Avartas 


Kakshadhara 

Stanyarohita 

Urvi 

Stanamula 

Ani 

Kurpara 

Indrabasti 

Kurchcha Shirah 

Kurchcha 
Talahridaya 


Kurchcha Shirah 
Kshipra 


Adhipati 

Shankha 

Sthapani 

Phana 

Nila & Manya 
Apastambha 
Urvi 


Hridaya 
Apalapa 
Kurpara 
Nabhi 
Basti 

Lohitaksha 



Vidhura 

Krikatika 


ms a 


Ansaphalaka 
Brihati Shirah 


Parshva 

Sandhi 

Nitamba 


Manivandha 
Kurchcha 
Kshipra 

Vitapa 
Guda 


Kurchcha 



Gulpha 

Kurchcha Shirah 


































The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Marma 

Arm & Leg Marma Location, Number, Size 

Governs 

Tala Hridaya 

center of palms and soles (4 points/i.e., 1 per limb) 1/2 

finger width 

lungs 

Kshipra 

between big toes/fingers & first toes/fingers (4 points) 
1/2 finger width 

heart, lungs 

Kurchcha 

2 finger widths (anguli) of client, above Kshipra- of 
feet and thumb roots (4 points/i.e., 1 per limb) 4 finger 

widths 

Alochaka Pitta 

Kurchcha 

Shirah 

just below the ankles (8 points/2 per limb) 1 finger 
width and sides of wrists 

muscle spasms 

Indrabasti 

center of the calf muscle (in line with the heel-12 
fingers above it) 1/2 or 2 finger widths (varying views) 

digestion, 

intestines 

Ani 

four fingers above Janii (just above kneecaps) front 
and back. 1/2 finger width 

muscle tension 

Urvi 

thigh center (front and back) 1/2 finger width 

Udakavaha Srota 

Lohitaksha 

joint of groin and thigh (2 points) 1/2 finger width 

leg blood supply 

Manibandha 

center wrist joint (2 points) 2 finger widths 

relieves stiffness 

Kurpara 

on elbow joint (2 points) 3 finger widths 

heart, spleen liver 

Kakshadhara 

between chest and shoulder (2 points) 1 finger width 

muscle tension 

Gulpha 

foot/calf junction (Achilles tendon area) 2 finger 

widths 

relieves stiffness 

Janu 

calf/thigh junction (center of kneecap and directly 
behind it on the back of knee)(2 points) 3 finger 

widths 

heart, spleen liver 

Vitapa 

between groin and scrotum (measure from Lohitaksha, 
down & angled towards scrotum, length-index finger 
tip to its midjoint-2 anguli) (2 points) 1 finger width 

belly muscle 
tension, 
impotence, 

semen 






















Section 3: Therapies 


Abhyanga/Marmas 


Chapter 7: Pancha Karma 


Marma 

Trunk: Thorax/Back Marma Location, Size 

Governs 

Guda 

perineum, 4 finger widths ( ahguli ) 

reproduction, colon, 
urine, gas, stool, 1st 
chakra stimulation 

Basti 

between pelvis/navel, 4 finger widths 

urinary, Kapha 

Nabhi 

navel, 4 finger widths 

seat of all veins transfer 
points, small intestines 

Hridaya 

between nipples, 4 fingers widths 

main Pitta marma, 
Sadhaka Pitta, Vydna 
Vayu 

Stanamula 

just below nipples, 2 points, 2 finger widths 

Kapha, Pitta, blood 
circulation 

Stanarohita 

above breast nipple (from Stanamula, from the index finger tip to 
mid joint), 2 points, 1/2 finger width 

Kapha, Pitta, arm 
muscles 

Apastambha 

either side of trachea base- mid collarbone area, 2 points, 1/2 
finger width 

blood, sympathetic/ 
parasympathetic nerve, 
lungs 

Apaldpa 

the armpit, 2 points, 1/2 finger width 

blood, sympathetic/ 
parasympathetic nerve 

Katlkataruna 

sacrum top by spine/lower buttocks, 4 points, 1/2 finger width 

fat, constipation, Vayu 

Kukundara 

just above buttocks, both sides of spine, 2 points, 1/2 finger width 

reproduction, 
elimination, leg mobility, 
controls 2nd chakra 

Nitamba 

5 fingers above & lateral Kukundara, over hip bone (on back), 2 
points, 1/2 ahguli 

Vayu & Pitta digestion, 
vitality, RBC 

Parshva Sandhi 

from Nitamba, measure from the index finger tip to the mid joint, 
and lateral (about 1" up and 1" to the side), 2 points, 1/2 ahguli 

Pitta, digestion, 
elimination 

Brihati Shirah 

between shoulder blades, on both sides of spine (directly behind 
Stanamula), 2 points, 1/2 finger width 

a major Pitta 
accumulation site. 
Controls 3rd chakra 

AnsaPhalaka 

above Brihati (arm root - mid shoulder blade), 2 points, 1/2 finger 

width 

Vayu touch/sensation, 
atrophy, 4th chakra 

Ansa 

5 finger widths above Ansaphalaka 

between shoulder bones- 
between shoulder & 
neck, 2 points, 1/2 finger 
width 

The first eight are located on the thorax & trunk. The last seven are located on the back. 
























The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Marmas 

Head & Neck Marmas 

Governs 

Dhamani (Nila & 
Many a) 

both sides of the trachea 
(posterior/anterior sides of larynx, 
respectively, 2 points, 4 finger 
widths 

speech, taste, perception, 
blood, transfer marma 

Matrika 

4 points on each side of the throat, 4 
finger widths 

blood circulation 

Krikatika 

head/neck junction (back of head), 2 
points, 1/2 finger width 

tremors, disability, stiffness 

Vidhura 

just below the back of both ears, 1/2 
finger width 

hearing, head support 

Phana 

both sides of the nostrils, 1/2 finger 
width 

smell, sinus, ears, stress 

Apahga 

outer corners of both eyes-ends, 1/2 
finger width 

vision, stress 

Avartas 

above both outer eyebrows, 1/2 
finger width 

depression, vision, posture 

Shankha 

temples-front bone (above 
eyebrows), 1/2 finger width 

colon 

Utkshepa 

1 finger width above Shanka, 2 
points, 1/2 finger width 

colon 

Sthapani 

center of eyebrows, 1/2 finger width 

main Vayu marma, mind, 
nerves, hypothalamus 

Shringataka 

[4 points] cleft, under nose, outside 
eye bones, nose tip 

eyes, ears, nose, tongue, 

nerves 

Simanta 

sideways and upwards on the skull, 4 
finger widths 

sanity, grounding, 
intelligence, blood 

Adhipati 

crown chakra (baby's soft spot), 1/2 
finger width 

mind, nerves, epilepsy 





















Section 3: Therapies 


Abhyanga/Marmas 


Chapter 7: Pancha Karma 


Marmas and Chakras 


Sthapani 

6th chakra- Aghd 
lungs- respiratory system, 
mind, nerves, colon, heart, 
bones (main Vayu marina) 
pituitary 


Hridaya 

4th chakra- Andhata 
circulation, blood, spiritual 
goals, discrimination, thymus, 
Sadhaka Pitta, Vyana Vayu 
(main Pitta manna). 


Guda 

1 st chakra- Muladhara 
reproductive, urinary, 
menstrual systems, obesity, 
prostate, excretory, Apdna Vayu 



Adhipati 

7th chakra- Sahasrdra 
mind, nerves, ether, pineal 

ila & Manya 

5th chakra- Vishuddha 
blood, liver, spleen 
thyroid 


Nabhi 

3rd chakra- Manipura 
small intestine, subtle 
body, Pachaka Pitta, 
adrenals, pancreas 
Samana Vayu 


Basti 

2nd chakra- 
Swdclhishthdn 
All Kapha functions, 
water metabolism, 
urinary system, pituitary, 
gonads (testes & ovaries), 
(main Kapha marina) 












The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Marma Points and the Srotas (Bodily Systems) 

The various bodily systems (srotas) are also balanced with marma work. 

Srota 

Marma 

Governs 

Pranavaha 

Sthapani 

respiration, heart, lungs/asthma 

Annavaha 

Indra Basti 

digestion/ indigestion, gas, nausea, diarrhea, 
stomach, intestines 

Udakavaha 

Basti/Urvi 

water metabolism, pancreas, diabetes 

Rasavaha 

Nila/Manya 

lymphatic/lymph glands, Kapha disorders 

Raktavaha 

Hridaya/Nila/Manyd 
Brihati Shira/Matrika 

blood, hemoglobin/liver, spleen, skin rashes, 
bleeding disorders 

Mamsavaha 

Tala Hridaya/Guda/ 
Stanarohita/Indrabasti 

water metabolism/pancreas, diabetes 

Medavaha 

Guda 

fat (adipose)/ kidneys, visceral membrane 

Asthivaha 

Sthapani/Adhipati/ 
Shankha/Utkshepa 

Skeletal/bones, colon, hair, nails 

Majjavaha 

Simanta/Shringataka/ 
Sthapani/Adhipati 

nervous system-marrow/ bones, joints, 
memory, insomnia, anxiety, worry 

Shukravaha 

Guda/Kukundara/Vitapa 

male reproductive/genitals, impotence, 
prostate, TB 

Mutravciha 

Katlkataruna/ 

Kukundar/Basti 

colon, urinary bladder 

Purishavaha 

Krikatika/Guda/ 

Sandhi/Urvi/Adpathi/ 

Shanka/Basti/ 

Kartikataruna 

rectum, anus, diarrhea, constipation, colitis, 
blood in stool, hemorrhoids 

Swedavaha 

Stanamula/Stanarohita/ 
Kakshadhara/Basti 

adipose tissue, skin pores, sweating 

Artavavaha 

Katlkataruna/ 

Kukundar/Basti 

Females-uterus, fallopian tubes/PMS, 
menstruation problems, menopause, 
i'erlUdy/Apana Vayu 

Stanyavaha 

Stanamula/Stanarohitam 
/Ka shadha ra/Basti 

Females-breasts, nipples/lactation, breast 
tumors and abscesses 

























Section 3: Therapies 


Abhyanga/Marmas 


Chapter 7: Pancha Karma 


Three of the seven mannas relate specifically to the three doshas, 
and are the primary mar mas worked with. 


Dosha Marma Points 



We have detailed the three doshas, Vayu (air), Pitta 
(fire), and Kapha (water). A dosha excess means an 
increase of that element in the body and/or mind. 
These excesses or imbalances are mild or severe 
diseases (depending upon the degree of the excess). 
For example, excess Vayu can develop into 
constipation, dry skin, anxiety, etc. Further, most 
illnesses can be caused by any dosha excess (e.g., 
asthma can be caused by any of the doshas. Each 
dosha has its own unique set of symptoms. This 
enables one to detect the dosha causing the disease). 
This yogic or spiritual tool is unique to Ayurveda. 
Thus, one can fine tune or note distinctions instead 
of merely working with generalizations. This insight 


into individualized symptoms is an invaluable tool in 
determining the root cause of an illness. 

Each dosha has five aspects—or sub -doshas — 
that further describe the different activities that each 
dosha performs. The sub -doshas govern various body 
functions. For example, we know that one function 
of Vayu is related to stool elimination. One sub -dosha 
exists to specifically govern the downward movement 
of the air, called Apana Vayu. This added insight al¬ 
lowed the ancients to know which manna points were 
related to downward moving air, and to properly 
stimulate or reset this downward flow. Through 
abhyahga and stimulating manna points the down¬ 
ward flow air flow can be restored or balanced. 













The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Vayu Major Marma Points 


Sthapani 

mind, nerves, 
hypothalmus 
(main Vayu marma) 


Adhipati 

mind, nerves, 
epilepsy 

Nila & Manya 
(transfer point) 


Basti 
urinary, 
near colon 



Nabhi 

seat of all veins 
and nerves; 
transfer point 


Guda 

reproduction, 
colon, urine, gas 
stool, 1 st chakra 
stimulation 





















Section 3: Therapies 


Abhyanga/Marmas 


Chapter 7: Pancha Karma 


Secondary marma points exist for Vayu; these 
points are used with the main mannas as assisting 
points. One traditional Vayu method involves the use 
of one hand on the main Vayu marma point 
(iSthapani), while the other hand is used on the minor 
Vayu marma points. 


This approach is similar to polarity therapy, which 
was derived from Ayurvedic marma abhyanga. 
Persons will also notice that a ‘mirroring’ effect 
occurs; some of the same points are sited on both the 
arms and legs. 


Secondary Vayu Marmas 

































The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Marma Points and the 5 Vayus 


Nila & Manya 

Udana- upward air 
throat, speech, 
memory, 
complexion, 
will, higher 
aspirations 


Nabhi 

Samana- 
equalizing air: 
small intestine, 
digestion, 
elimination 



Adhipati 

Prana- outward air: mind, 
nerves, senses/sneezing, 
belching, expectorating, 
inspiration, swallowing 


Hridaya 

Vyana- pervasive air: 
muscle joints, circulation, 
walking, lifting, body 
movements, opening/ 
closing eyes 


Basti 

Apana- downward air: 
anus, thighs, elimination 
(semen, ovum, feces, urine, fetus) 

Guda —* 


Major Pitta Marma Points 


Sthapani 

mind 


Nila & Manya 
blood 



Hridaya 

circulation, liver 
spleen, skin 
(main Pitta marma) 


Basti 

urinary 



















Section 3: Therapies 


Abhyanga/Marmas 


Chapter 7: Pancha Karma 


Minor Pitta Marma Points 


Apanga 

vision 

Matrika_ 

circulation 
Kakshadhara 
male reproduction 

Urvi 

Stanamula 

small intestine, blood 

Kurpara 

liver, spleen 

Indrabasti 

digestive fire, 
esophagus, stomach, 
small intestine 


Kshipra 



Avartas 

vision 


Stanarohitam 

small intestine, blood 


Apastambha 

blood in chest, 
cough, asthma 

Urvi Brihati Shirah 

blood heat excess, blood 


Parshva 
Sandhi 

small intestine 

Kurnara blood in 
Kurpara abdomen 

Lohitaksha 

blood 


Kshipra 

vision 


Vitapa 

male reproduction 


Janu 

liver, spleen 


Ansaphalaka 

small intestine 



Katika- 

taruna 

pallor from 
loss of blood 




































The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Marmas and the 5 Pittas 


Adhipati 

Sadhaka Pitta- 
digests truth and 
spiritual goals 


Hridaya 

Sadaka Pitta- 
digests truth and 
spiritual goals 



Kurchcha 

Alochaka Pitta- 
vision 


Nila & Manya 

Bhrajaka Pitta- 
complexion, skin 


Nabhi 

Pachaka Pitta- 
small intestine's 
digestive fire, 
supports all Pittas 
/Ranjaka Pitta- 
blood, liver, 
stomach, small 
intestine, spleen; colors 
bile, blood, stool 


Kurchcha 



Katlkataruna 

Bhrajaka Pitta- 
complexion, skin 


Final Abhyanga and 
Energy Transfer Marmas 

After abhyanga the practitioner checks the major 
dosha manna points (Sthapani —third eye, 
Hridaya —heart, Basti —below the navel) feeling for 
energy and heat comparisons. If one mahd marma 
still feels out of balance, additional time is spent 
balancing the transfer mannas, the throat (Nila and 
Many a), and navel (Nabhi) chakras. 

The process begins with one hand on, or over the 
crown chakra (adhipati) and the other hand on, or 
over the main dosha marma of the client. 

Next, one palm lightly rests on, or is held slightly 
above one of the mahd marmas. The other palm is 


placed on, or over the throat transfer point, then after 
a while, moves to the navel transfer point. For ex¬ 
ample, if there seems to be too much air in the region 
between the eyebrows (Sthapani Marma), the prac¬ 
titioner keeps one palm on, or over this marma. The 
other palm is on, or over the throat. This position is 
held for some time, then the hand over the throat 
moves on, or over the navel. When the hand is by the 
throat, excess air transfers out of the head and sends 
in extra warmth or fire from being near the heart 
manna (Pitta mahd manna). Similarly, when the hand 
is by the navel, it sends moisture from the nearby 
Basti manna (a Kapha mahd manna) in the direc¬ 
tion of the head. 



























Section 3: Therapies 


Abhyanga/Marmas 


Chapter 7: Pancha Karma 


Kapha Major and Minor Marma Points 




















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Manna 

Definition 

Manna 

Definition 

Talahridaya 

Center of palms and soles 

Brihati 

Shirah 

large region of the back 

Indrabasti 

Indra's bladder: mid-forearms and 
calves 

Ansaphalaka 

Shoulder blade 

Ani 

Lower region of upper arms and 
legs 

Ansa 

Shoulder 

Lohitaksha 

Red eyed: lower frontal area of arm 
and leg joints 

Krikatikd 

Neck joint 

Stanarohita 

Upper region of the breast 

Vidhura 

Distress from sensitivity 

Apastambha 

Upper sides of the chest (carries the 
life force) 

Phana 

Serpent's Hood: nostril 
sides 

Apaldpa 

Unguarded: the armpits 

Apdnga 

outer eye corners 

Katikataruna 

Rising from the sacrum: center of 
the buttocks 

Avarta 

Calamity from 
sensitivity 

Kunkundara 

Loin marking both sides of spine 
base where buttocks meet 

Utkshepa 

Thrown upwards: above 
temples 

Nitamba 

Upper buttocks region 

Sthapani 

Giving support 

Parshwasandhi 

Sides of the waist 

Adhipati 

Overlord: crown of the 

head 


The sizes of the mannas are measured by fin¬ 
ger breadth, called anguli or angula (e.g., 1 anguli 
is the width of one’s own finger). All marma mea¬ 
surements are made with the client’s own fingers, not 
the fingers of the practitioner. Most of the mannas 
have the same meaning as their position, making it 
easy to remember their location. The charts below 
oup the mannas according to size. 


1 angula 


Manna 

Definition 

Vitapa 

perineum 

Kakshadhara 

upholding flanks top of shoulder joints 

Un’i 

wide mid-region of thighs and forearms 

Kurchchashira 

head of Kurchcha base of thumb/big toe 


























Section 3: Therapies 


Abhyanga/Marmas 


Chapter 7: Pancha Karma 


2 angula 


Marma 

Definition 

Manibandha 

bracelet 

Gulpha 

ankle joint 

Stanamula 

breast root 

Shankha 

conch: temples 


3 angula 


4 angula 

(Some say the size of one’s own palm) 


Marma 

Definition 

Janu 

knee joint 

Kurpara 

elbow joint 


Marma 

Definition 

Guda 

anus 

Basti 

bladder 

Hridaya 

heart 

Ncibhi 

navel 

Nila 

dark blue: color of veins at 
this location 

Simanta 

summit: skull & surrounding 
joints 

Matrikd 

blood vessel's mother: 

arteries flow to head from 

here 

Kurchcha 

knot: muscles or tendons at 
base of thumbs/big toes 

Shringataka 

crossroads of four streets: 
soft palate of mouth 

Manyd 

honor 


Reference: Ashtanga Hridayam Ch. 4; v.60-63.5 
Different authorities use slightly different measurements 


Abhyanga Oils 

Ayurveda offers numerous oils for various pancha 
karma, abhyanga, and nasya treatments. Presently 
many of the oils are not readily found in the US. 
Brahml, chandan, neem, and ma-hdnarayan oils 
seem to be among the main oils used. Below is a 
sample of some Ayurvedic oils and which diseases 
they help. Oils often can be applied externally, taken 
internally, and as nasal drops. 


Oil 

Use 

Brahml 

Head & eyes 

Chandan 

Fever, alcoholism, 
confusion, burning, 
rheumatism, jaundice, 
mental diseases 

Durba or Neem 

Dandruff 

Gandha 

Sprains, fractures 

Kshlraba 

Hemiplegia, nervous 
disorders, acute gout, 
rheumatic pain, 
paralysis 

Mahanarayan 

Hemicrania, glands, 
facial paralysis, 
conception, arthritis, 
pain 

Mahamasha 

Hemiplegia, facial or 
arm paralysis, lockjaw 

Kumkum 

Acne, pimples 

Nararsas 

Nasal polyps 


f A 

X23 


Dosha Marma Oils 

Essential oils appropriate to one’s dosha are 
placed on the marma points that relate to theft dosha. 
On the next page is a partial list of these oils. For 
further explanations about oils, see Chapter 8 on 
aromatherapy. 






































The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Dosha Manna Oils 

Vayu 

Pitta 

Kapha 

Sandalwood 

Sandalwood 

Sandalwood 

Rose 

Rose 


Jasmine 

Jasmine 


Lily 

Lily 


Vanilla 

Vanilla 


Lavender 

Lavender 


Patchouli 


Patchouli 

Basil 


Basil 

Frankincense 


Frankincense 

Myrrh 


Myrrh 

Sage 


Sage 

Cedar 


Cedar 

Musk 


Musk 

Lotus 


Lotus 

Eucalyptus 


Eucalyptus 

Cinnamon 


Cinnamon 


Geranium 



Lemongrass 



Gardenia 





























Section 3: Therapies 


Kerala-Style Abhyanga 


Chapter 7: Pancha Karma 


Kerallya Ayurvedic Abhyanga 

Contemporary Methods 

Kerala is a state in southern India where pancha 
karma abhyanga has been preserved. However, un¬ 
like pancha karma, it is used more for rejuvenation 
purposes than for cleansing. Various contemporary 
forms of abhyanga are used in Kerala, and are very 
effective. Some modem authorities note that some of 
these practices are especially useful in healing seri¬ 
ous mental disorders. However, other modem authori¬ 
ties believe they aggravate the condition. Practitio¬ 
ners have noted that procedures such as shim dhara 
have evoked troubling past emotions in some per¬ 
sons. Therefore, persons who have very deep emo¬ 
tional problems may be advised by some practitio¬ 
ners to heal through herbs, aromas, and professional 
counseling first. 

Several important differences exist between 
Kerala and ancient pancha karma therapies. 


Ancient Rules 

Kerala Rules 

pancha kanna must 
be done only during 
certain seasons 

pancha karma can 
be done in all 

seasons 

oil and sweat are 
preliminary 
therapies 

oil and sweat are the 
principle therapies 

treat the constitution 

treat the illness 

purification/reducing 

oriented 

palliation/toning 

oriented 

Only five therapies 

more than five 
therapies 

not done when too 
hot or cold; or when 
cloudy or rainy) 

especially effective 
when rainy 


5 Keraliya Pancha Karma Categories 


Therapy 

Benefits 

f . Dhcira Karma 
(Shiro Dhara) 
Avagahan 
Parislieka 

diseases of the mind, Prana 
Vayu, CNS, ears, eyes, nose, 
and throat; facial palsy, 
insomnia, nervous disorders, 
memory, psychosis, fainting, 
confusion, excess perspiration, 
alcoholism, coma, etc. 

2. Kciya Seka 
(Pizhichil) 

promotes tissue strength, 
biological fire, luster, 
complexion, ojas, clear senses, 
Vayu disorders, muscle spasms, 
degenerative muscle disorders 

3. Pinda Sweda 

heals neuromuscular (facial 
paralysis, MS, muscular 
atrophy), and some systemic 
diseases/ most useful of the 
therapies 

4. Anna Lepa 

used when Pinda Sweda does 
not work (medicated grains) 

5. Shiro Lepa 

Mental and brain disorders 


Both dhara and lepa are palliative measures that 
eliminate excessed doshas. They remove stagnant, 
sticky toxins from the body’s channels (srotas) with¬ 
out applying traditional reducing methods 
(shodhana). Both can be given at all times in all sea¬ 
sons. 


1. Dhara Karma 

Three forms of this therapy exist. 


1. head baths (shiro dhara) 

2. whole body baths 
(sarvanga dhcira) 

3. local bath (ekanga dhara) 


Even though there are numerous treatments in 
Kerallya Pancha Karma they all fit into five major 
categories. 




Dhara karma makes use of medicated oils, milk, 


























The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


ghee, etc. (see page 246). Sarvanga Dhara 
(.Avagdhan —medicated baths) and Ekdnga Dhara 
(Parisheka—liquid sprinkling) were previously dis¬ 
cussed under sudation therapy on pages 182 to 183. 

Dhara karma makes use of medicated oils, milk, 
ghee, etc. (see page 246). Sarvanga Dhara 
(Avagdhan —medicated baths) and Ekdnga Dhara 
(Parisheka—liquid sprinkling) were previously 
discussed under sudation therapy on pages 182 to 
183. 

Medicated oils include bhrihgardj, bald, musta, 
sandalwood, licorice, medicated milk, and medicated 
decoctions. Examples of ingredients for each dosha 
include the following: 

Vayu— bald, dashmul, bhrihgardj, sesame oil. 

Pitta—sandalwood, coconut water, bhrihgardj, 
musta. 

Kapha—licorice, bald, bhrihgardj. 


2. Kaya Seka (Pizhichil) 

This form of abhyahga is said to be most 
beneficial for rejuvenating the nervous system. In this 
method, the medicated oil used during dhara karma 
is poured over the person’s body from a height of 15 
ahguli (head) and 13 ahguli (body), while 
simultaneously being rubbed into the body. These 
heights may cause the oil to splash on practitioners, 
so old clothing is worn. Pizhichil is also known as 
Taila Seka or Sarvanga Senchana. This method 
strengthens the tissues and promotes the biological 
fire. 

Oil and ghee can be reused for another 3 days, but 
must be replaced on the 4th day. When mi lk and 
vinegar are used they are replaced daily. 

Healthy persons can receive kaya seka twice daily, 
using a mixture of sesame oil and ghee. For weaker 
persons a 2- to 6-day interval between sessions is 
advised. The body’s luster and beauty are enhanced, 
ojas becomes stabilized, and sense organs are cleared. 
The process also promotes longevity, regeneration, 
and rejuvenation of the body. It is especially good for 
Vayu disorders. The same massage table, eye 
protection, and other oil requirements used in pinda 
sveda and shiro dhara are applied here (see page 240). 


For healthy persons, warm sesame oil and/or ghee 
are used along with rejuvenating herbs (e.g., 
shatdvari, ashwaganclhd, guduchl). Medicated milk 
or sour vinegar can be used in place of medicated oil. 
For Pitta disorders, oil or ghee can be unheated. Kapha 
and Vayu disorders require warm oil. However, 
unheated oil is used on the head in all cases. 

Four practitioners attend the seated person. Two 
practitioners massage from the shoulders to the navel, 
and the other two practitioners massage from the navel 
to the feet. In this approach, cloths are soaked in ghee 
or oil and squeezed on the body (or oil is poured on 
the body from vessels) with the right hand. The left 
hand rubs the oil into the body. Again, insuring 
uniform pressure and movement, at a moderate speed, 
among all the abhyahga practitioners is important. 
Hand strokes start from the upper portion of the body 
and move downward. 

A cloth is tied around the eyebrows to prevent 
liquids from dripping into the eyes. Again, oil applied 
to the body is lukewarm, while the oil applied to the 
head is at room temperature. A fifth practitioner keeps 
the cloths in warm oil and replaces them as they cool 
off. When lying down, the head faces the east in the 
morning and the west in the evening. The person 
receives massage for 1 hour in the same seven 
positions as in pinda sveda (page 236). 

If the treatment lasts for 14 or 21 days, the hour- 
long session is gradually increased by 5 minutes from 
the 2nd day on, until it reaches li /2 hours. When it 
reaches 1 1/2 hours (i.e., the 7th day), the time of each 
session is shortened by 5 minutes. For the 21-day 
series, upon reaching the 7th day (ll/2hours), the 
sessions remain at the 1 1/2 hour time through the 14th 
day. From the 15th day on, each session is reduced 
another 5 minutes. It is stated that the oil fully 
penetrates one tissue layer (dhatu) a day. Thus, on 
the 1 st day the oil is absorbed only into the s kin . Since 
there are seven dhatus, it takes seven days for oil to 
completely penetrate all the tissue layers. 






Section 3: Therapies 


Kerala-Style Abhyanga 


Chapter 7: Pancha Karma 


Some authorities suggest that Vayu disorders re¬ 
quire a 2-hour session and Vayu/Kapha disorders only 
require 1 hour. In these cases, the oil is applied first 
and absorbed for a 100 to 300 count before massage 
begins. These times should correspond with the fore¬ 
head, chest, and armpits beginning to perspire. The 
abhyanga is then over. 

At the end of the session the client sits again while 
their shoulders and back are massaged vigorously. 
While this is happening, the oils are wiped off with a 
towel. 

If persons feel tired after receiving the abhyanga, 
they may be lightly fanned, sprinkled with cold water; 
then rest. Afterwards, the body is massaged, and the 
excess oil is rubbed off with a towel. Fresh oil is then 
applied to the body and head, and chick-pea flour 
(besan ) is sprinkled over the oil to remove the exces s. 
The head and body are then cleansed again of excess 
oil by wiping off the flour. Persons then bathe in 
lukewarm water (room temperature water for the 
head) to wash off the flour. After bathing, they put on 
clean clothes and drink a cup of ginger/ coriander 
tea. If hungry, they may eat a light, boiled meal with 
carminative herbs (e.g., turmeric, cardamom) for 
Vayu and Kapha doshas, or coriander and fennel for 
Pitta doshas. 

Following kaya seka, persons remain on this diet 
for as many days as they have received treatment. 
The number of abhyahgas depends upon the strength 
of the person and the strength of the disease they have. 
They may receive abhyanga daily, or on every second, 
3rd, 4th, or 5th day; abhyanga requires 14 days for 
one course of treatment. 


3. Pinda Sveda (Navarakizhi) 

This is considered the most important of all the 
Kerallyan methods. It is also used in traditional 
pancha karma. Pinda sveda is a rejuvenation 
technique that causes the entire body to perspire by 
using medicinal puddings followed by abhyanga. 

Pinda sveda makes the body supple, and removes 
stiffness, and swelling in the joints. It heals Vayu dis¬ 
eases, clears obstructions, improves blood circula¬ 
tion, removes wastes from the body, improves com¬ 
plexion, increases Pitta, strengthens digestion, and 
restores vigor. It also prevents excessive sleep while 


promoting sound sleep. This therapy is very effec¬ 
tive in healing disorders of the nervous system and 
brain (e.g., paralysis, MS, chronic rheumatism, os¬ 
teoarthritis, gout, muscle emaciation, and toxic 
blood). It makes the entire body strong, sturdy, and 
well developed. The senses are sharpened and the 
aging process is slowed. Insomnia, high blood pres¬ 
sure, diabetes, skin disorders, balding, premature 
graying, and wrin kl es are prevented. It is helpful for 
all neuromuscular diseases and some systemic (whole 
body) diseases. 

In this procedure a warm bolus of medicated grain 
is applied to the body. Snehana or body oil application 
is a prerequisite for pinda sveda. A cloth is tied around 
the eyebrows to prevent oil from dripping into the 
eyes. 



Preparation of Decoction and Pudding: About 17.5 
ounces of bald root (crushed chips) are poured into 
two gallons of water and boiled until only 1/4 of the 
water remains. This decoction is then strained, leav¬ 
ing a 1/2 gallon quantity. One quart of this decoction 
is mixed with one quart of cow’s milk. The other quail 
is retained for later use. Next, about 17.5 ounces of 
dehusked and crushed rice is added and cooked until 
the decoction becomes a semisolid pudding 
(pdyasam). 

Eight pieces of soft and strong cloth, about 15 
square inches in size, are used to hold the pudding. 
The pudding is divided equally into 8 portions and 
placed in the cloths. The edges of the cloths are 
wrapped together and tied with string. 







The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


For Vayu diseases, some authorities suggest using 
black gram, ghee, oil, porridge, or puddings. Pinda 
Kapha disorders can be done with barley or sand. 

Pr e-Pinda sveda: Traditionally, persons giving 
abhyahga offer some prayers and meditate before 
beginning the therapy. Then, oil is applied over the 
head and body of the client. Head oil is not very 
greasy; body oil is greasy (medicated oils differ 
according to illness). Oil application helps maintain 
the uniformity of the heat of the pudding ball (bolus) 
and protects the s ki n from sudden evaporation and 
perspiration. Experimenting sudden cold or draft after 
the treatment may cause various forms of respiratory 
diseases. 

A piece of cloth is tied around the eyebrows to 
prevent oil from dripping into the eyes and irritating 
them. A special abhyahga table is used, just like the 
shim dhara table (see p. 239). Practitioners use a table 
with or without legs; standing or squatting while 
giving abhyahga. Four practitioners are required, 
along with a supervisor and an attendant who heats 
and replaces the boluses. All four practitioners need 
to use the same degree of pressure when rubbing. 
The atmosphere is quiet. Traditionally men do 
abhyahga on men and women on women. All clothing 
is removed except undershorts. The room is well 
ventilated, with soothing lighting. Drafts, dust, and 
direct sunlight are to be avoided. 

Four bundles are removed from the simmering 
liquid and left to cool for five minutes. The bolus is 
held by the tuft in the right hand and placed on the 
back of the left hand to check the temperature. 

Method: The session always begins at the neck, 
and the movement is always in the downward 
direction. Two practitioners are on each side of the 
person. Two persons work in simultaneous motion, 
at the same temperature and pressure, from the neck 
to the hip. The other 2 persons work in unison from the 
hip to the soles of the feet. While the first 4 bundles are 
used, the remaining 4 are kept heated in the decoction. As 
the bundles cool, the attendant replaces them with the warm 
ones and reheats the cool boluses. The attendant ensures 
that no intemiption duiing abhyahga occurs. The attendant 


constantly replaces the practitioners’ cooled boluses with 
warm bundles. 

Persons receive Pinda sveda in seven alternating 
positions. Abhyahga continues for 15 minutes in each 
position. 


1. sitting 

5. lying on their 
back 

2. prone (lying on 
one's back) 

6. lying on their left 
side 

3. lying on their 
right side 

7. sitting 

4. lying on their left 
side 



When the liquid in the bowl is used up, the bo¬ 
luses are opened and the pudding is applied over the 
body and rubbed for 5 minutes. It is then gently 
scraped off with a blunt edge and the head is gently 
wiped dry with a towel. 

The head and body are then anointed with the ap¬ 
propriate medicated oils (according to the nature of 
the illness or dosha). 

Post -Abhyahga: Next, the client takes a lukewarm 
bath with the appropriate herbal decoction added to 
the water. The head is not washed or submerged in 
the bath water; water at room temperature is used to 
wash the head. Chick-pea flour is rubbed on the body 
and head to remove the excess oil. 

After the bath, persons are wrapped in cotton or 
wool and rest for about an hour (but do not sleep), 
avoiding drafts, sun, noise, dust, cold, and smoke. At 
this time persons are advised to medietate or men¬ 
tally recite holy scriptures of their respective faiths. 
After an hour, persons may eat a light meal. 

•dtHf 













Section 3: Therapies 


Kerala-Style Abhyanga 


Chapter 7: Pancha Karma 


Depending upon the strength and nature of the 
disorder persons are experiencing, 

Pincla sveda may be applied daily, 
or on alternating days for 
7, 9, 11, or 14 days. 

Pinda sveda is good for persons of all ages, but 
caution is advised for those with heart diseases. 
However, if boluses are applied with uniform 
temperature, no adverse effects will develop. 


Lepas 

Medicinal Plasters 

These methods are considered the most important 
method to reduce inflammatory swellings. All plasters 
are applied against the direction of the hair (i.e., in an 
upward direction). Plasters are removed as soon as 
they dry (except when drawing pus to a head). For a 
further introduction to plasters, see the earlier 
discussion under sudation on page 180. 

Lepas can include a number of ingredients: 
kushta, vachd, barley, oil, dmalakl, and mixed with 
water. The consistency of lepas is semisolid, and is 
neither too thin nor too thick. 

If oil or ghee is included in the lepa, 1/4 the amount 
of the herbs is added for Vayu dosha, 1/6 the amount 
of herbs is used for Pitta lepas, and 1/8 the amount of 
herbs is mixed for Kapha dosha. 

Three forms of this procedure exist. 

1. Pralepa: These pastes are thin and cold, and 
have either absorbing or non-absorbing properties. 
They restore deranged blood and Pitta. 


withdrawing local bad flesh, stopping pus from forming 
in ulcers, correcting doshas, relieving Pitta-burning 
sensations, Vayu aches and pains, severe itching caused 
by Kapha, and cleansing the skin, blood and flesh. 

The Sharhgadhar Samhitd discusses these types 
of lepas and their respective paste thickness. 



Lepa 

Thickness 

1. Dosha -reducing 
(< doshaghna ) 

1/4 ahguli 

2. Poison removal 
(vishaghna) 

1/3 ahguli 

3. Cosmetic (varinya 
mukhalepa) 

1/2 ahguli 


An example of a lepa for all forms of edema 
includes ingredients l ik e punamavd, cedar, and 
ginger. 

A dashmul and milk plaster is useful for acute pain. 
Ghee is added in plasters for Vayu rheumatism. 
Unlike abhyanga oil, plaster is not reused. 


2. Pradhena: These pastes are applied either thick 
or thin, cold or warm. They have non-absorbing 
properties. They reduce Vayu and Kapha excesses; 
purify and heal ulcers; and reduce swelling and pain 
(in either ulcerated or non-ulcer conditions). 

3 . Alepa/Atepanam: These pastes are applied over 
ulcers. They are either arrestive or astringent. Results 
include stopping local bleeding, softening ulcers, 


Anna Lepa 

When Pincla Sveda is contraindicated or ineffective, 
Anna Lepa is used. This Kerallyan therapy is not 
merely contemporary treatment. Its use is discussed 
in the ancient Ayurvedic texts, Charak Samhitd and 
Ashtanga Hridayam. Preparation of ingredients, 
methods, and proportions for Anna Lepa are the same 
















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


as for Pincla Sveda; only medicated grains are used without 
the oil application. 

Shiro Lepa 

The use of herbal pastes to treat brain disorders, 
and head and neck diseases is also discussed in the 
traditional Ayurveda texts, Charak Samhitd, Ashtanga 

Hridayam and Sushruta Samhitd. Herbs include 
sandalwood, kushta, bald, musta, licorice, triphald, 
dashmiil, and are chosen according to the health con¬ 
cern. 

The procedure is simple. Medicated oil (e.g., 
brdhml, bhrihgaraj, dmalaki) is applied to the hair 
and scalp before the herbal paste is applied to the 
hair (not on the forehead). It is removed from the 
hair after 1 1/2 hours. Steam therapy is then applied to 
the body. After shiro lepa a lukewarm medicated bath 
is given (as described under Pinda sveda). 

Shiro Lepa: 

1. Oil is kept in hair for 1 1/2 hours 2. 

Steam therapy 3. Lukewarm medi¬ 
cated bath 

Shiro Lepa is given either: 1. 

Once 

2. Alternating days or 
daily for 1 week 

Other forms of abhyahga exist in Kerala and 
throughout India; there are too many to mention here. 
Ayurveda, like most professions in India, is a family 
tradition passed on from parent to child. Thus, many 
methods are unique to each family. 


Shiro Dhara 

(Hot Oil Flow On The Head Abhyanga) 

Unique to Ayurveda is the hot oil flow on the head. 
Warm oil poured on the forehead is one of the most 
divine, relaxing therapies one can experience. ‘Shiro ’ 
means head, and ‘dhara’ means flow. When people 


get up from this therapy, a healthy glow radiates from 
their s ki n. People look 20 years younger. Eyes gleam 
with tranquillity while lips wear a smile of serenity. 

Shiro dhara helps with diseases of the head, Prana 
Vayu, neck, eyes, ears, nose, throat, and nervous 
system. It also relieves insomnia, asthma, cholesterol, 
enlarged prostate, ulcers, rheumatism, etc., and is used 
to heal difficult diseases l ik e diabetes, schizophrenia, 
and epilepsy. Various methods of shiro dhara exist. 
The traditional approach includes giving the client a 
short haircut and combing the hair. A modified version 
is described here, taking into consideration modem 
day practicalities of time and finances. 

General Method: The client lies on an abhyahga table 
or a specially built oil table which drains the excess 
oil. The oil is held in a quart-sized bowl. A small 
hole, a little less than 1/2 inch, is in the bottom-middle 
of the bowl. A spigot might be attached to the bottom 
of the bowl to more accurately control the oil flow. 

The bowl material retains heat, so the oil does not 
cool before it is poured on the client’s head. If the 
bowl hangs over the client’s head, the therapist doesn’t 
have to hold the bowl for the entire session (45 
minutes, to 1 1/2 hours). Three holes must be in the 
top of the bowl so that a chain or string can be used to 
suspend the bowl from the ceiling or mobile stand. 
The distance from the hole or spigot to the forehead 
is 2 to 3 inches. 








Section 3: Therapies 


Kerala-Style Abhyanga 


Chapter 7: Pancha Karma 


A traditional bowl was set up a little differently. 
Inside the bowl, half a coconut shell was placed open- 
side down. It too had a hole at its base. A string, about 
6 finger-widths long was placed through the hole and 
tied to a stick (2 to 3 inches wide). The other end of 
the string was threaded through the hole in the bottom 
of the bowl, and hung 2 to 3 inches above the person’s 
forehead (see diagram to right). 

Below the table was another wide-mouthed bowl 
or pan to catch the oil that falls from the head after 
being poured. Having a heater under this pan to keep 
the oil warm may be useful if it will be reused during 
the session. 

The bowl is filled with enough warm oil to 
continue the flow for an entire session. If this is not 
possible, then one stops every so often to replace the 
drained oil (oil is reheated if necessary before 
reapplying). 


1. HANDLE 


Ideally, the client with a severe illness will be 
vacationing at the Ayurvedic resort and receive daily 
sessions for 7 to 14 days. Weekly sessions are useful 
and sometimes more practical. 




Fourteen-day treatment: The first session lasts for 
1 hour. From the 2nd day to the 7th day of the 
treatment, 5 minutes are added to each session, with 
a maximum time of 1 1/2 hours. From the 8th day 
through the 14th day, the time is reduced by 5 minutes. 
In this way the 14th session lasts for 1 hour again. 

Twenty-one-dav treatment: The 7th through 14th 


day times are kept at 1 1/2 hours. Then, from he 15th 
day on, the session is reduced by 5 additional minutes. 
Shiro dhdrd is usually never given more than 21 days. 
It is believed that the medicated oil flow completely 
affects the entire body in 21 days. 

Early morning is the best time for shiro dhdrd; 
spring and fall are the best seasons for shiro dhdrd . 
















































The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Shiro Dhara: 

A 14 - or 21-day series is ideal 
Weekly or monthly sessions 
are more practical Best 
Tune: Early morning Best 
Seasons: Spring and fall 


Procedure 

Shiro dhara is ideally practiced on auspicious 
mornings (according to the Indian astrological 
almanac — pahchang). It is best not to have eaten for 
at least an hour before the therapy. The room should 
be clean, quiet, have fresh air, and no drafts. Any 
windows should have curtains to prevent sun glare 
and to ensure privacy. Soft-colored lights, incense, 
or aromas suitable for the client help create a healthy 
and calming environment, even before the session 
begins. Soft spiritual music, like classical Indian 
ragas; can enhance the session. Ragas for each time 
of the day exist to further harmonize the relaxation 
and healing process. 

Before therapy, the practitioners meditate, 
preparing themselves to be effective healers. Clients 
and practitioners practice mantra meditation during 
the session to keep their minds spiritually focused. 

Whether clients stay at an Ayurvedic resort for 
several days or weeks, or make daily visits for shiro 
dhara, they are advised to follow their Ayurvedic 
lifestyle. Appropriate foods, baths, exercise, spiritual 
studies, yoga, etc. are recommended. This further 
balances one’s constitution and develops good habits. 
Thus, persons feel the maximum healing effects and 
find it easier to follow their program once they return 
home. 

Clients receiving weekly sessions, will find relief 
from the stress and strain of their daily work 
schedules. This is truly a constructive form of 
pampering. 

In a traditional session the client sits on the 
massage table facing east. Room-temperature oil is 
poured through the hair three times. Then, the body 
is massaged below the neck (i.e., from the shoulders 
down) with slightly warm oil. A cloth is placed or tied 


over the eyes to prevent oil from leaking into them during 
shiro dhara. 

Practitioner and client can meditate 
before and during shiro dhara to bring 
the highest spiritual energy into the 
heeding session 

The client is supine on a massage table with a pillow 
under their neck for comfort. Oil is released from the 
bowl onto the forehead. Traditionally, oil is circled 
on the third eye (just above and between the 
eyebrows). Modem experience finds that many people 
find this directed application too powerful. Thus, oil 
must be moved around the entire forehead and 
temples. 

When the oil in the bowl (or funnel) runs out, it is 
once again placed in the bowl and reused. If the oil is 
cool, it can be reheated during the session or just after 
the bowl is empty. 

After the session is over, the client rests for a 
few minutes on the table. The oil in the hair is pressed 
into the scalp as its warmth further soothes the client. 
Then a towel is placed over the head and the 
practitioner helps the client sit up, making sure the 
head is covered with the towel to prevent the oil from 
dripping. The client is given a few minutes to adjust 
to the seated position. Then, they are helped to stand 
up. Sometimes they are so relaxed that they feel 
disoriented upon standing, so helping up them is 
important. 

If the weather is cool—to avoid catching a cold— 
a warm hat and scarf are worn when leaving the 
session. It is best that for the remainder of the day the 
client rest, taking light meals, and retire to bed early. 


Head-Soaking 
Oils Shiro Basti 

Shiro basti, l ik e shiro dhara, is another head oil 
application. However, in this method the oil soaks on 
the top of the head for some time. Shiro basti is useful 
in healing facial paralysis, insomnia, dry mouth or 





Section 3: Therapies 


Kerala-Style Abhyanga 


Chapter 7: Pancha Karma 


nose; cataracts, headaches, and other head diseases. It 
prevents and stops hair loss, balding, and premature 
graying. This therapy also strengthens hah' roots and makes 
the hair soft and glossy, heals eye problems, improves 
complexion and sinus disorders. Shiro basti balances the 
air and fluid (Vayu and Kapha) in the space between the 
brain and skull. 

The head oil (dhara drava) is prepared in differ¬ 
ent ways for different situations. Basic oils listed be¬ 
low are useful for shiro dhara as well. 

Dry hair: Coconut and sesame oils. 

Memory: brdhml, amalaki, bhrihgaraj oils. Young 
Women: Black sesame, bhrihgaraj, amalaki oils. 
Women 40 to 50: Black sesame, wheat germ, 
almond oils. 

Women 5Q+: Black sesame, coconut, wheat germ, 
sandalwood oils. 

Newlyweds: Coconut, jasmine, almond, wheat- 
germ oils. 

Ear Pain: Mustard oil 

Vayu: Sesame, coconut, canola, brdhmi oils 
Pitta: Sunflower, coconut, brdhmi oils Kapha: 
Canola, mustard oils 

All: Sesame, brdhmi, bhrihgaraj, amalaki oils 


the oil from leaking. The dough is placed in a circle 
parallel to ear level. A belt or rope is used to secure 
the bladder to the head. 

Method: After a person completes the appropriate 
pancha karma therapies, oleation and fomentation 
are given. Next, the person sits on a stool or chair 
(knee-height). The paste is applied to the head under 
the cap to prevent the oil from leaking. The flour, 
cap, and belt are placed on the head. The medicated 
oil is heated to a lukewarm temperature and is then 
placed in the bladder on the head. Oil should be about 
six inches above the scalp (one finger width). 

It remains on the head for about 2 hours, 45 
minutes; 2 hours, 15 minutes; 1 hour, 40 minutes; or 
until the mouth and nose begin to expel secretions 
and clients feel relief from their symptoms. The length 
of time the oil remains on the head varies according 
to the dosha causing the disorder (Vayu, Pitta, Kapha 
respectively). 

For healthy persons who are merely receiving 
preventive measures, oil remains on the head only 
for approximately 17 minutes. The therapy lasts no 
more than 7 days. 


Many complicated formulations, such as takra 
dhara, kshir dhara, can be prepared. Since these prod¬ 
ucts are scarce outside of India (and also for the sake 
of simplicity), plain oil or any of the above-mentioned 
medicated oils can be used. 

Precaution: In some cases Vayu becomes aggravated 
during extended treatments. To counter this, clients 
receive a warm oil abhyanga followed by a warm 
medicated bath. 

Definition: Basti is defined as a bladder or container 
that holds medicated herbs and oil. Shiro basti is 
somewhat similar to shiro dhara in that the oil is 
placed on the head. The differences are that in shiro 
basti, the oil is kept soaking on the head. 

The bladder can be made of a flexible plastic, ap¬ 
proximately 3 feet high. The circumference is wide 
enough to fit around the head. Whole-grain flour is 
mixed with warm water (2:1) and kneaded into dough. 
It is used between the head and bladder to prevent 



Oil Funnel 
^Basti) 

elt or rope 


Flour Paste 
under basti 


SHIRO BASTI 























The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Shiro Basti Duration 


Disease 

Time 

Vayu 

about 2.45 hours 

Pitta/Blood 

about 2.3 hours 

Kapha 

just over 1.3 hours 

Healthy 

17 minutes 


The oil is taken out of the cap, the belt is 
removed; then the cap and paste are taken off. The 
head, neck, shoulders, and back then are rubbed 
gently. Afterwards, persons take a lukewarm bath. A 
wholesome diet according to one’s constitution is 
then taken. Shiro basti is repeated daily for three, 
five, or seven days. 


Post Shiro Basti: 

1. Gently rub head, neck shoulders, back 2. 
Lukewarm Bath 


Shiro Basti: 

Taken daily for 3, 5, or 7 days 


Ear-Oil 

(Kama Purana) 

This procedure involves placing oil into the ears. 
Some authorities suggest 1 to 2 drops. Others suggest 
filling the entire ear cavity with oil. Ear oil heals 
disorders of the sense organs such as earaches or pain, 
deafness, ringing in the ear, all ear diseases and 
headaches; lockjaw, giddiness, twisted (wry neck), 
and diseases of the gums and teeth. Certain nerves 
connect the eyes and ears with the feet. Thus, this 
treatment also relieves burning sensations in the feet. 
Kama purana is done during the day, before meals. 



Head Oil 
Murdha Taila 

The Benefits of head-oil therapies include 
preventing and healing hair loss, graying, and hair 
matting, cracking of the scalp, Vayu head disorders; 
producing sharpness of the senses, improving the 
strength of the voice, lower jaw, and the head. Two 
other methods of applying oil to the head are worth 
mentioning: 

1. Pouring oil in a continuous stream 
(parisheka) removes scalp ulceration and boils, 
burning sensations, and wounds. 

2. Wrapping a cloth over the head and soaking in 
oil (picu) prevents hair loss, cracking of the scalp, 
and burning sensations. 


Kama Purana 
is done before meals 

Method: Lukewarm sesame oil or medicated oil is 
poured in the ear canals, filling them up. Oil remains 
in the ears for 10 to 20 minutes. For preventive care, 
oil remains in the ear for about 17 minutes. For ear 
pain, the root of ears can be massaged until the pain 
subsides. 

Ear (and eye) therapies always begin with the right 
side. A tissue is kept nearby to wipe up any dripping 
oil. Clients first lie on their left side while the oil is 
poured into their right ear. 














Section 3: Therapies 


Kerala-Style Abhyanga 


Chapter 7: Pancha Karma 


After the process is complete, a small bowl or cup 
is placed behind the ear to catch the oil as it comes 
out. The client slowly turns their head to the right 
and the oil pours out of the ear and into the cup. They 
may then roll onto their back in order for the 
remaining oil to be released. A tissue is placed on the 
ear to prevent any excess oil from dripping. The 
process is then performed on the left ear. 


Eye Therapy 

(Ashcotana - Anjana Vidhi) 

(Also discussed in Chapter 19) 

Ayurveda employs eye drops and eye salves for 
prevention and healing diseases of the eyes, l ik e 
bleeding, itching, tearing, burning sensation and 
redness. 

Eye drops: (Ashcotana) are warm for Vayu 
diseases, lukewarm for Kapha disorders, and cold for 
Pitta ailments. The person lies on a bed in a draftless 
room. Their eyes are opened with the practitioner’s 
left hand, while the liquid is dropped in the eye with 
the right hand. Ten to 12 drops are placed in the eye 
from a distance of 2 finger widths from the inner angle 
of the eye. 

A soft, clean cloth is placed over the eyes for a 
few minutes (a warm cloth is used for Vayu and 
Kapha disorders). 

Eye salve: (Anjana) is used after a person has 
undergone pancha karma, and the il lness is localized 
only in the eyes, when diseases are matured, such as 
in edema, severe itching, sliminess, and thick 
excretions. 

Three types of anjana exist: 

1. Scraping (lekhana) using astringent, sour, 
salty, and pungent tastes 

2. Healing (ropana) with bitter tastes 

3. Vision clearing (prascidana) using sweet 
tastes 

Time: The recommended time for salves is 
morning or evening. Application is not recommended 


irritates the eyes—because it increases the illness and 
spreads it elsewhere. For Kapha diseases that require 
scraping eye salve, daytime application is acceptable 
if it is not too hot a day. During very cold weather, 
night application will further aggravate the illness. 

Precautions: Anjana is not used on those suffering 
from fear, after emesis and purgation, when hungry, 
when having the urge to urinate or defecate; when 
angry, when feverish, or when the eyes are tired. It is 
also not used with a headache, when experiencing 
grief and insomnia; when cloudy, after smoking, when 
drinking alcohol, or just after washing hair. Anjana 
is not suggested with indigestion, when tired due to 
excess exposure to fire or sun, just after day naps, or 
when thirsty. This therapy may bring up strong 
emotional issues. 

Post-Application: Eyeballs are gently and briefly 
rubbed and slowly rotated up. The eyelids are also 
gently massaged. This is to spread the salve 
throughout the eye. It is not recommended to open, 
close, squeeze, or wash eyelids. When the salve no 
longer has an effect, the eyes are washed (water 
temperature is according to the disease, dosha and 
season). This removes the disease cleansed from the 
salve. The left eyelid is lifted and held with a piece of 
clean cloth in the fingers of the practitioner’s right 
hand, and vice versa. If there is itching or a lack of 
results from the salve, a stronger salve or strong smoke 
inhalation is used. Persons are strongly advised to 
rest in a darkened room for at least one hour before 
exposure to light and activity. 


before evening sleep, at noon, and when the sun 

^ 243 ^ 


Eye-Bath (Netra Basti) 

(Also discussed in Chapter 19) 

This therapy involves washing the eyes with 
medicated oils or ghee. Benefits include relieving 
tension in the eye sockets that may lead to loss of 
vision, pain, fatigue, glaucoma, cross-eye, 
conjunctivitis, night blindness, cornea inflammation, 
sunken eyes, and other eye disorders. Further, it 
nourishes the nervous system, brain, memory, and 










The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


develops one’s linguistic abilities. It makes the eyes 
lustrous, removes wrinkles, improves complexion, 
reduces physical tension. 

Method: Dough is prepared using flour and water 
(2:1). The dough is made into two rings to fit around 
the eyes, 1 1/2 inches in height. One half cup of luke¬ 
warm ghee is kept warm nearby. Oleation and fo¬ 
mentation of the face are done in advance. The lights 
are dimmed so as not to disturb the session. Next, the 
temperature of the ghee is tested (several drops may 
be placed on the wrist, or a finger is swirled in the 
ghee). Ghee should be lukewarm. The dough dam is 
placed around the eyes, the base pressed onto the face 
to prevent oil from leaking. A little ghee is then poured 
into the dough-dam (around the eyes) while eyes are 
closed. If the temperature is comfortable, the remain¬ 
ing oil is poured into the dam until it covers the eye¬ 
lashes. Eyes are then opened when comfortable (ini¬ 
tially it may take some time adjusting to the liquid). 
The eyes may be slowly rotated clockwise, counter¬ 
clockwise or moved in the 8 compass directions. 


Eye Condition 

Length of Eye Bath 

eyelid disorders 

30 seconds 

eye joint circles 

95 seconds 

white circles 

3 1/2 minutes 

black circles 

4 minutes 

refractive disorders 

4 1/2 minutes 

glaucoma 

5 minutes, 5 seconds 

Vayu disorders 

done daily 

Pitta disorders 

alternate days 

Kapha /healthy eyes 

done every two days 


If netra basti is overdone, one experiences itching 
and Kapha disorders. This therapy can cause strong 
emotional releases. It is not advised for those with 
emotional disorders. 



Dough 

Some authorities suggest that the ghee be kept in the 
eye for 20 minutes. Others say that for Vayu disorders 
it is kept in for 6 minutes. For Pitta disorders and 
healthy persons oil remains in the eye for 3 1/2 minutes 
and only for 2 minutes, 45 seconds for Kapha 
diseases. Afterwards, persons need to rest for 1 to 2 
hours in a dark room. When going outside, if it is 
bright sunglasses should be worn. 


Lower Back Bath 
(Katti Basti) 

The main benefits of this therapy are for muscle 
spasms and lower spin rigidity, and strengthening the 
bone tissue of the lower back. The same method of 
preparing dough as in the eye bath is used here. Place¬ 
ment of the dough dam is however around the spine 
of the lower back. 

Chest/Heart Bath 
(Uro Basti) 

This therapy strengthens the heart and reduces 
sternum pain. Again, the dough dam is prepared in 
the same manner as the eye bath. The dam is placed 
over the heart (left breast) 

Body Powder-Rub 
(Udgharshana) 

Herbal powders may be applied to the body to 
promote healing. They heal itching, Vayu disor- 



















Section 3: Therapies 


Kerala-Style Abhyanga 


Chapter 7: Pancha Karma 


ders, hives, and develop a stable, light body. Rub¬ 
bing the s ki n after water is sprinkled on the body 
removes dirt, opens the sweat glands, and activates 
the enzymes in the s ki n. Afterwards, water is again 
sprinkled on the body and the skin rubbed to 
remove the powder. 


ance slowly through herbs, foods, aromas, colors, and, 
if needed, professional counseling. 

Dosha Beauty Care 
Facial Abhyanga 

Depending upon one’s dosha different facial 
oils are used. 


Ayurvedic Foot Massage 

Padabhyanga 

Abhyanga applied to the feet is a simple, enjoy¬ 
able and healthy thing to do. It prevents dryness, 
cracks, and roughness of the skin; numbness, fatigue, 
sciatica, cramps; and contraction of ligaments, ves¬ 
sels, and muscles of the feet and legs. It removes Vayu 
from the body, promotes sturdy limbs and feet, 
strength for walking, and sound sleep. Further, nerves 
from all the organs in the head and body terminate in 
the feet (also in the hands, ears, and head). Thus, by 
rubbing the feet, persons tone the whole body. A close 
relationship exists between the feet, eyes, and ears. 
Foot abhyanga helps heal and prevent disorders of 
hearing and sight. Four important nerves in the soles 
are connected to the head. Constant friction and pres¬ 
sure on the nerves in the soles reduce eye sight. 
Abhyanga on a daily basis, or at least several times a 
week, restores health to these nerves. It is best done 
before bedtime, mbbing the soles and tops of the feet 
with some warm sesame oil. This also fosters sound 
sleep. 

General Suggestions 

After all abhyahgas, clients are advised to rest for 
1 to 2 hours before returning home. It is best if an¬ 
other person drives them home to avoid the stress of 
driving. If this is not possible, then when reaching 
home, they rest. Light meals and rest are advised for 
the remainder of the day. An early bedtime that 
evening is strongly suggested. Some people find 
abhyanga so relaxing that they sleep through the next 
day, releasing deep-seated stresses. 

As discussed earlier in this section, persons with 
emotional problems may find the abhyahgas too pow¬ 
erful. Therefore, it is advised to achieve mental bal¬ 


Dosha 

Oils 

Vayu 

ghee, sesame, avocado 

Pitta 

coconut, safflower, 
sunflower 

Kapha 

canola, almond, olive 

Tridoshic 

sesame, jojoba, almond 


For various s ki n disorders, essential oils may be 
used, see the “Dosha Marma Oil” chart (page 232) 
in this chapter, and Chapter 8 on Aromatherapy. 


Face Care 


Conditions 

Essential Oil Mixtures 

Wrinkles 

fennel, lavender, rose, 
frankincense, cypress 

Acne 

bergamot, juniper, cypress, tea 
tree, lavender 


Miscellaneous Skin Care 


Conditions 

Therapy 

Eye care 

triphala, kajal 

Stretch marks 

almond oil 




















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Cosmetic Plasters 

(Varnya Lepa) 

To improve complexion and color, medicated 
herbal pastes are applied to the skin. The applied paste 
is 1/2 ahguli (1/2 one’s linger width). 

Complexion, pigmented patches on face: Red 
sandalwood, mahjishtha. kushta. 

Acne: Coriander, vachd, black pepper 
Dandruff: Kushta, licorice, rock salt, mixed 
into a paste with honey. 

Facial Hair: Excess Pitta unbalances the hormones. 
A mixture of ashok, fennel, shatavari, cardamom, 
triphala, rock candy are taken internally, and 
sandalwood and multani methi clay are mixed with 
water to form a lepa for the face. The lepa is left on 
from 4 hours to overnight (2 times weekly). Hot spices 
and steroids aggravate this condition. 

Properties of Paste Liquids 

Ghee: PV- K (neutral). Unctuous/Cool 
Uses: It promotes taste, semen, and ojas, alleviates 
burning, develops a soft body, voice, and complexion; 
and strengthens the metabolism and digestion. Ghee 
improves the voice and complexion, and has a special 
property of transporting herbal properties to all the 
dhatus (tissues). 

Oil: 

Uses : Oils promote strength, health, and a stable body. 
They improve the skin and cleanse the urogenital tract 
(especially for females). 

Sesame Oil V- KP+ in excess 
It gives strength, intelligence, digestive power, helps 
the skin, and has antioxidant properties. When taken 
with the appropriate herbs, it heals all disorders. 
Castor Oil: Sweet, astringent-hot P+ 

Castor is a digestive stimulant and a purgative. It helps 
with obstructed abdominal diseases, gas, tumors, stiff 
lumbar region, colic pain, ulcers, edema, dma, 
abscesses, clears vagina and semen. 

Coconut Oil: Sweet-cold-sweet VP- K+ 

This oil is best for Pitta doshas, nourishing and soft¬ 
ening the skin. It is useful for inflammatory s ki n con¬ 
ditions, psoriasis, eczema, sunburn, bums, rosacea. 
[Sample s ki n oil: coconut oil 100 ml.; almond oil 50 
ml.; sandalwood oil 5 ml.] 


Milk IDugdhai: VP- K+ Sweet/Cold; unctuous Uses: 
(Cow’s) Milk is best when it is organic and raw (if 
possible). It gives rejuvenation, strength, intelligence, 
and ojas. Milk heals semen and blood diseases, dif¬ 
ficult or painful breathing; consumption, hemor¬ 
rhoids, complexion, and giddiness. It is considered 
holy (sattwic). 

Goat Milk: Light 

This form of milk is better for Kapha doshas. It is 
a digestive stimulant, heals hemorrhoids, diarrhea, 
menorrhagia, toxic blood, giddiness, and fever. Some 
say it heals all diseases. 

Yogurt/Curd (Dadhi): V- PK, Blood-i-Astringent/Hot/ 
Pungent unctuous. Again, organic yogurt is advised. 
Uses : This is a digestive stimulant and gives strength. 
It heals dysuria, coryza, diarrhea, anorexia, 
emaciation, and coldness in the body. 

Sweet yogurt reduces Vayu and Pitta. Sour yogurt 
increases Pitta, Kapha, and blood toxins. Very sour 
yogurt causes bleeding disorders. Sweet and sour 
yogurt has mixed effects. 

Water: P- Cold 

Uses: It is a cardiac tonic, heals poisoning, giddiness, 
burning, indigestion, exhaustion, vomiting (cold), 
intoxication, fainting, and alcoholism. 


Liquid, Paste and Oil Preparation 

The general formula for mixing these three 
ingredients is, 

1 part paste (herb powder) 

4 part oil 

16 parts liquid (e.g., milk, decoction, herb 
juice, water) 

For decoctions, paste is 1/6 its quantity. 

For plant juice, paste is 1/8 its quantity. 

When a recipe calls for 4 or fewer liquids, the 
amount of each is 4 times that of the oil. 

When there are more than 4 liquids in a recipe, 
then each is in equal proportion to the oil. 


















Section 3: Therapies 


Kerala-Style Abhyanga 


Chapter 7: Pancha Karma 


Preparation: The herbal paste and liquid are mixed 
together; then oil is added and the entire mixture is 
boiled. As it is cooked, the mixture is constantly stirred 
to prevent paste from sticking to the bottom of the 
pot. 


Ayurvedic Beauty Suggested Reading 

Kushi A, Tawari M. Diet for Natural Beauty. 

New York, NY: Japan Publications; 1991. 
Murthy KRS. (transl.) Sharngadhar Samhita. 
Varanasi, India: Chaukhambha Orientalia; 
1984 [Section 3; Ch. 11]. 

Sachs M. Ayurvedic Beauty Care. Twin Lakes, 
WI: Lotus Press; 1994. 


Pancha Karma Suggested Reading 

BhishagratnaKL. (transl.) SushrutSamhita. Varanasi, 
India: Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series; 1991. 

Dash B. Abhyanga Therapy in Ayurveda. New Delhi, 
India: Concept Publishing ;1992. 

Devaraj TL. The Pahchakarma Treatment of 
Ayutyeda. Bangalore, India: Dhanwantari Orien 
tal Publications; 1986. 


Institute for Wholistic Education. Marma Point 
Therapy [video]. Twin Lakes, WI: 1989. 
Govindan SV. Massage for Health and Healing. 

New Delhi, India: Abhinav Publications; 1996 
Gray H. Gray’s Anatomy. Philadelphia, PA: 
Running Press; 1974. 

Guyton A. Textbook of Medical Physiology. 

Philadelphia, PA: Saunders Co.; 1981. 

Johari H. Ancient Indian Abhyanga. New Delhi, 
India: Munshiram Manoharlal Publishers:1988. 
Joshi SV. Ayurveda & Pancha Karma. Twin Lakes, 
WI: Lotus Press; 1997. 

Merck Manual. Rahway, NJ: Merck Research 
Laboratories; 1992. 

Murthy KRS (transl .) Ashtanga Hridayam. Varanasi, 
India: Krishnadas Acadamey; 1991. 

Murthy KRS. (transl.) Sharngadhar Samhita. 

Varanasi, India: Chaukhambha Orientalia; 1984. 
Ranade S. Natural Healing Through Ayurveda. 

Salt Lake City, Utah: Passage Press; 1993. 
Sharma RK, Dash B. Charak Samhita. (editors) 
Varanasi, India: Chowkhamba Sanskrit 
Series; 1992. 

Singh RH. Pancha Karma Therapy. Varanasi, India: 
Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series; 1992. 






The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 



J MjdxrLcmljcjCLL § 7 It-IlLIlA- 














Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 8: Aromatherapy 


As bubbles and foam 
are non-existent without water 
This world is non-existent 
without eternal Divinity (Brahman). 

Vedic saying 


Chapter 8 
Aromatherapy 



s mentioned earlier, Ayurveda’s main 
therapy is herbal, with a secondary empha¬ 
sis on good or nutrition. These therapies 
work predominantly on the gross or outer physi¬ 
cal level. Aroma therapy, gem therapy, color, and 
mantra (or sound) therapies work on a more subtle 
level, healing through the mind, the senses, and 
the absorption of subtle impressions. 


It is especially useful to place drops of oil on 
various body sites: the crown, third eye, temples 
(for headaches), at the root of the nose (for sinus 
problems), or at the heart. Oils are more practical 
to use while in the company of others who may 
not like to breathe any kind of smoke (e.g., at the 
office). 


Aromas 

Pure fragrances are used for healing. Aromas 
are commonly used in the forms of incense flower 
essences, and essential oils. Other methods of 
aromatherapy include pure scented candles, soaps, 
and sachets. Aromas are most effective when pure 
(i.e., not diluted with chemical substances). They 
are used externally, and unless mixed with a dilut¬ 
ing or base oil, some oils burn the skin. If taken 
internally, the mucus membranes would be harmed. 
They should not be placed too close to the eyes or 
any bodily orifice. A suggested base oil for each 
dosha is provided in the table below. 


Dosha 

Base Oil 

Vayu 

sesame 

Pitta 

coconut or sunflower 

Kapha 

canola or mustard 


A generally accepted ratio of essential oil to 
base oil is the following: 

25 ml. (12-13) drops: 1 fluid ounce base oil 


Ayurvedic Marma Points 

These are specific sites on the body that bal¬ 
ance the doshas and their associated health situa¬ 
tions when oils are applied to them. Marinas were 
discussed in detail in the last chapter. To summa¬ 
rize, the main marma points for each dosha are 
given in the table below. 


Dosha 

Main Manna 

Vayu 

third eye (between 
eyebrows) 

Pitta 

heart chakra (chest center) 

Kapha 

between the navel and 
pubic bone 


Steam/Sweat Therapy 

Aromatic oils are used in these therapies as well, 
being directed at specific sites (e.g., arthritis in the 
hands). 

Aromas balance the three humors and prana, 
ojas, and tejas. Below is a list of commonly used 
essential oils: 















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Primary Oils 

Aromatic oils have the same properties as the herb 
and plant. 

Basil: ( Tulsi) VK- P + 

Uses : Cleanses mind, phlegm, colon, purifies air, 
reduces fever and viruses, removes Apana Vayu 
(downward air), increases devotion and intuition 

Camphor: ( Karpur ) VK- P+ 

Uses : Opens the mind, senses, lungs, increases 
perception and meditation, alleviates headaches 
and arthritis, can be used for puja (devotional 
ritual), calms hysteria, neuralgia, and other ner¬ 
vous ailments; insect repellent. External—sprains, 
inflammations, rheumatism. Precaution—large 
doses are toxic 

Cedar: ( Devadaru ) (Juniper - Hapusha ) VK- P+ 
Uses : Diabetes, arthritis, edema, air cleanser 

Eucalyptus: VK- P+ 

Uses : Opens the mind, senses, lungs, removes 
phlegm and alleviates depression, cleanses nega¬ 
tive psychic thoughts 

Frankincense: ( Kapitthaparni ) VK- P+ 

Uses : Heart, head, blood, and nerve cleanser; pain 
reliever, strengthens joints, calms mind, increases 
faith, virtue, detachment, and devotion, removes 
negative psychic thoughts 

Gardenia: P- (VK+ in excess) 

Uses : Cleanses the blood, kidneys, heart, fevers, 
and infections (including uterine) 

Ginger: ( Sunta ) VK- P+ 

Uses : Colds, flus, headache, lung congestion, joint 
and muscle pain, improves pulse and appetite, en¬ 
hances joy and creativity 

Iris: P- VK+ 

Uses : Cleanses the blood, lymphatic, liver, heals 
infections, helps remove jealousy, envy, anger, and 
hate f 


Jasmine: ( Mallika ) P- K+ (V+ in excess) 

Uses : Heals breast and uterine infections, also heals 
cancer (especially lymph), strengthens a woman’s 
reproductive system and makes her more attrac¬ 
tive; removes depression (P+ men) 

Lavender: ( Dharu - H) VPK= 

Uses : Calms emotions and nerves (good for hy¬ 
peractive children), PMS 

Lily: ( Kumuda ) VP- (K+ in excess) 

Uses : Calms heart, nerves, and emotions (irrita¬ 
bility, anxiety, insomnia), dry cough, tonic for 
stomach and lungs, increases faith, devotion, and 
virtue 

Lotus: ( Padma, Shatapatra ) VPK= 

Uses : Calms mind and heart, effects deep sleep, 
increases love, faith, devotion, compassion, builds 
ojas (i.e., strengthens the reproductive system and 
nerves), is antiallergenic, calms nerves, relieves 
spasms. It is the symbol of Self-Realization 

Mint: (Peppermint: Paparminta- H; 

Spearmint: Pahadi pudina - H) VPK= 
Uses : Clears mind, head, and sinuses 

Musk: ( Kasturi ) VK- P+ 

Uses : Revives those who are comatose or near col¬ 
lapse, strengthens heart and reproductive system, 
awakens senses, is the most rajasic oil 

Myrrh: ( Bola ) VK- P+ 

Uses : Blood cleanser, relieves infections, decreases 
tumors, strengthens bones, heart, uterus, and 
nerves; reduces excess fat, helps tissue healing 

Patchouli: ( Pacholi - H) VK- P+ 

Actions : Stimulant, diaphoretic, expectorant, di¬ 
uretic, carminative 

Uses : Cleanses digestive system, stimulates senses, 
gives joy (removes depression), is especially good 
for Kapha. Externally—insecticide (moths, ants, 
gnats, flies, mosquitoes) 
























Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 8: Aromatherapy 


Rose: ( Rudhrapushpa, Japa) (flower of the 
heart) P- VK+ 

Uses : Eye tonic (as rose water), increases love, 
compassion, devotion, acts as female reproductive 
tonic, urogenital tract, fevers, cough 

Rosemary: PK- V+ 

Uses : Blood, heart, circulatory system, tonic, helps 
headaches and emotional tension, promotes men¬ 
struation 

Sandalwood: ( Chandan ) (best aroma for the 
mind) VP- K+ in excess Sattwic 
Uses : Heart and lung tonic, cleanses kidneys, re¬ 
duces fever, irritability, and anxiety; promotes 
meditation 


Ayurvedic Aromatherapy 

As mentioned above, essential oils must be mixed 
in base oils before application to the skin. 

Aches & Pains 

Oils : Myrrh, cinnamon, mahanarayan 

Base : Rubbing alcohol, beeswax (mahanarayan oil 

is mixed with sesame oil) 

Uses : Headaches, neuralgia, arthritis 

Antibacterial 

Oils: Sandalwood, myrrh, jasmine, gardenia, iris 
Uses: Cools blood, fevers, infections; builds the 
immune system, removes thirst and delirium 

Congestion 

Oils : Eucalyptus, sage, basil, mint 
Base : Alcohol 

Uses : Near nose, or inhaling as steam 

Digestive Aids 

Oils : Cardamom, cloves, fennel, ginger 
Uses : Promotes agm/digestion 

Digestive Stimulants 

Oils : Cardamom, cloves, fennel, ginger 
Uses : Promotes agm/digestion 


Gynecological Disorders 

Oils : Rose, rosemary 

Uses : Regulates menstruation (apply to problem 
site, or soak in an aroma-bath) 

Immune Functions 

Oils : Myrrh, frankincense, rose, lotus 
Uses : Strengthens immune system, build ojas, 
(external infections) 

Infections 

Oils : Eucalyptus, cedar 

Uses : Parasites, repel insects/insect bites, cleanses 
the skin, air, and aura 

Rejuvenatives (Rasavanas) 

Oils & Uses : 

frankincense—blood and brain 
guggul—brain and bones 
myrrh—blood, heart, uterus 
rose—heart and uterus 
lily—heart and brain 
sandalwood—nerves and brain 
lotus—heart and reproductive system 
gardenia and sandalwood—kidneys 
basil—nerves and lungs 
gardenia and iris—liver 

Soothing 

Oils : Sandalwood, rose, lotus, lily, lavender, 
frankincense 

Uses : Calming, prevent negative dreams, worry 
and agitation, insomnia 


Aroma Therapy & The Three Doshas 

Aromas can be derived from essential oils, in¬ 
cense, soaps, or sachets. Some examples follow. 

Dosha Oils 

Vavu : Mix musk, frankincense, basil, camphor, or 
cinnamon with sandalwood or rose 
Pitta : Sandalwood, rose, lotus, iris, gardenia, lily, 
lavender, honeysuckle 





























The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Kapha : Cinnamon, musk, sage, cedar, frankin¬ 
cense, myrrh 


Aromatherapy & Specific Uses 

(All oils are diluted as recommended in the previ¬ 
ous section) 

Acne : Camphor, eucalyptus, lavender; applied at 
night (12 drops cypress to 12 drops lemon in 2 fl 
oz. (50 ml.) coconut oil or brahml oil) 

Air Purification : Camphor, frankincense, basil, 
sandalwood, lavender 

Athletes Foot : Lavender—2 drops massaged into 
feet; tea tree oil also works but has less pleasant 
odor. For verruca (wart-like), lavender, eucalyp¬ 
tus, rosemary, or camphor is applied several times 
daily 

Bums : Lavender 

Depression : Ylang-ylang, clary sage, jasmine 
Earache : Lavender, 1 drop placed on a cotton ball 
and applied to the outer ear 
Fainting : Peppermint, rosemary, wafted under 
patient’s nose 

Feet : Baths: Use 5 drops peppermint oil to one 
lukewarm bowl of water 
Gums : Sesame oil 

Headache : Lavender on muscles at back of neck, 
on temples, forehead etc., sick headaches—use of 
peppermint oil, sniffed frequently, may help; also 
sandalwood, calamus, guggul, lily, frankincense; 
sometimes just taking a nap or going to sleep early 
helps—a drop of oil may be put on the pillow 
Hemorrhoids : Cypress oil: 5 drops in a bowl of 
warm water or bath, mix well as ‘sitz’ 
Hypertension : Lavender, myrrh, frankincense, saf¬ 
fron, rose, sandalwood, lotus, lily 
Mouth Ulcers : Myrrh, drop of oil 
Nausea : Lavender, rose, geranium: a few drops in 
a bowl of hot water 

Post Partum : Perineum Healing : (Especially if epi- 
siotomy was torn): Sitz bath: 2 drops cypress to 3 
drops lavender in large bowl of warm water or shal¬ 
low bath water. Cypress, with its constricting prop¬ 
erties, is an astringent that closes the raw blood 


vessels. Lavender heals and gently encourages new 
skin growth, while protecting raw areas. 

Sore Nipples : Diluted rose oil, but wash off com¬ 
pletely before each feeding so no harm will come 
to the baby during breast-feeding; 1 drop rose oil 
to 3/4 fluid ounce sweet almond oil (20 ml.). 
Post-Natal Depression : It is believed to be a hor¬ 
monal adjustment; jasmine bath; jasmine 
drop on the pillow edge; Ylang-ylang or clary sage 
are secondary substitutes. 

Lactation : Two drops fennel oil in honey water 
every 2 hours increases milk flow. (Herbs are also 
ingested in this case, including shatavarl, bala, and 
fennel.) 

Mastitis : (Breast inflammation) compress 1 drop 
geranium, 1 drop lavender, 2 drops rose in 11/2 
pints (850 ml.) cold water. 

Fatigue: Morning : Rosemary baths; naps, oil mas¬ 
sage with rejuvenatives mentioned above. 

Sore throat/Laryngitis : Two to three drops in honey 
water every few hours 

Sunburn : Lavender or peppermint oil bath, or mist 
Toothache : Clove, peppermint, prickly ash 
Weight loss : Juniper oil in bath once a week, if 
depression is the cause of overeating, see above 


Pregnancy: 

Stretch Marks : Twice daily breast and belly mas¬ 
sage; 20 drops lavender to 2 fl. oz. wheat germ oil 
Labor Pain : Hand-hot compress massage to lower 
abdomen as needed; 14 drops clary sage; 5 drops 
rose; 6 drops ylang ylang in 2 fl oz. sunflower oil 
Heartburn : Sandalwood applied to belly or ingest¬ 
ing one drop with a spoon of sunflower oil 
Constipation : Twenty drops marjoram; 5 drops 
rose; 2 fl oz. sesame oil 


Conversions: 

1 ml. = 20 drops/5 ml. = 1 teaspoon 



































Section 3: Therapeutics Chapter 8: Aromatherapy 


Aromas and Chakras 

Refer to Chapter 7 for dosha-specific aromas and for chakra locations 


Chakra 

Oil 

7 - crown 

Sandalwood, frankincense, myrrh 

6 - third eye 

Sandalwood, basil, lavender, 
jasmine, eucalyptus 

5 - throat 

Sandalwood, tea tree 

4 - heart 

Rose, lavender, sandalwood 

3 - solar plexus 

Sandalwood, lavender, fennel 

2 - groin 

Cedar, sage, ylang ylang, patchouli 

1 - base 

Ginger, vetiver 


Suggested Reading on Aromatherapy 

Davis P. Aromatherapy A-Z. Essex, England: C.W. 
Daniel Ltd.; 1988. 

Frawley D. Ayurveda Certification Course. Santa 
Fe, NM: American Institute of Vedic Studies; 
1995. 

Miller L, Miller B. Ayurveda and Aromatherapy. 


Twin Lakes, WI: Lotus Press; 1995. 

Nadkarni AK. Indian Materia Medica. Bombay, 
India: Popular Prakashan; 1993. 

Tisserand M. Aromatherapy for Women. Roches¬ 
ter, VT: Healing Arts Press; 1988. 

Tisserand R. Aromatherapy to Heal and Tend the 
Body. Santa Fe, NM: Lotus Press; 1988. 

















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 




J MjdxrLcmljcjCLL § 7 It-IlLIlA- 







Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 9: Hatha Yoga, Pranayama, Nada, Mudra, Bandha 


Chapter 9 

Hatha Yoga, Pranayama, Nada, Mudra, Bandha 

Chapter Overview 


Part 1 

Hatha Yoga (gentle stretching exercises).p. 257 

Part 2 

Pranayama (breathing exercises) and Nada (inner sound).p. 280 

Pranayama and Kumbhaka (breath retention).p. 284 

Part 3 

Bandhas (energy locks).p. 291 

Mudras (hand positions).p. 296 

Part 4 

Yoga for Pregnancy.p. 298 

Part 5 

Post-Partum Yoga.p. 301 

Part 6 

Yoga for Children.p. 304 

Part 7 

Yoga for the Office.p. 305 

Part 8 

Yoga for the Elderly and Physically Challenged.p. 308 

Part 9 

Yoga for Digestive Disorders.p. 309 

Part 10 

Medical Definitions.p. 310 

Suggested Reading.p. 311 


















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 



12561 



J MjdxrLcmljcjCLL § 7 It-IlLIlA- 














































Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 9: Hatha Yoga, Pranayama, Nada, Mudra, Bandha 


A plate, cup, and bowl are all made from the same clay. 

Like that, all of creation is made from the same eternal Brahman 

Upanishadic wisdom 


Chapter 9 

Hatha Yoga, Pranayama, Nada, Mudra, Bandha 


? rom the ancient Vedic literature, four texts 
on yoga asanas (postures) are the most 
respected: Hatha Yoga Pradlpika, 
Goraksha Samhita, Gherand Samhita, and 
Hataratnavali. These scriptures were written between 
the 6th century, when hatha yoga and pranayama 
began to emerge in India, and the 15th century A.D. 
This chapter correlates the information in these books 
with Ayurvedic physical and spiritual benefits. 

Many approaches to yoga asanas exist. Three well 
known methods are hatha, kundalinl, and ashtdhga. 
This chapter discusses and integrates these three yoga 
methods. 

Interestingly, hatha yoga was also found in pre- 
Colombian culture—not just confined to India. In St. 
Augustine, Columbia, ancient stone statues of people 
in yoga postures still exist today. 

General Information 

The underlying ideas to practicing yoga are the 
following: 

Be gentle, do not force any posture 
Forcing is against nature. 

Feel complete at whatever stage of the position one 
can attain. 

Completeness or union is the goal, 
not physical perfection of any posture 


Yoga asanas have three purposes. First they can 
be used as a means to prepare the student (along with 


pranayama breathing) for advanced spiritual practices 
l ik e mantra sadhana (meditation). This is especially 
true for hatha yoga. 

Second, when practicing non-forceful meditation, 
asanas may occur automatically, cleansing and 
integrating the mind, body, and spirit. Finally, 
Ayurvedic practitioners may recommend these 
postures for healing specific diseases. 

Hatha yoga has healed diseases—some thought 
to be incurable—from ancient eras in India through 
modem times. Its healing methods are explained in 
its definition. Spiritually, yoga means the union of 
the red spirit force at the base of the spine with the 
white spirit force at the crown of the head; the union 
of the sun-spirit at the navel with the moon-spirit at 
the head; and the union of the small self with the 
Divine eternal Self. 

Physically, yoga means the union of prdn (inward 
moving air) with apdn (downward/outward moving 
air); the union in which all the energy currents in the 
body flow up the sushumnd or main inner tube of the 
spine. On either side of the sushumnd are two 
secondary tubes. ‘Ha’ is the solar or right tube 
(pihgald) —Pitta predominant. ‘Tha’ is the lunar or 
left channel or nadl, called idd —Vayu/Kapha 
predominant. Thus, hatha yoga means the union of 
all physical energy currents into these two channels, 
which subsequently flow into the sushumnd. 

Each school of yoga emphasizes different things. 
Patahjali suggests that ethics (yama and niyama) is 
the way to cleanse the mind, body, and spirit; he 
emphasizes a more psychological approach to healing 
and Self-Rea liz ation. The book Hatha Yoga Pradlpika 
suggests the body’s organs and systems are to be 






The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


cleansed first through asanas and prdndydm. 
Ayurvedic practitioners allow each client to choose 
that healing path for which he or she is best suited. 

Yoga asanas and prdndydm have, along with medi¬ 
tation, become popular in the 1960’s in the west. 
However, along with their introduction they have also 
become westernized. Postures began to be taught as 
ends in themselves, merely to heal an illness, to re¬ 
duce stress, or to look better; the idea that these pos¬ 
tures are a foundation for Self-Realization was gen¬ 
erally ignored. The Hatha Yoga Pradlpika spends the 
first chapter reminding the student that Hatha Yoga 
is specifically used as the first step in Self-Realiza¬ 
tion; this goal must not be forgotten. 



Precautions For Beginners 

1. A soft, comfortable mat, blanket, or rug is used 
when practicing asanas. 

2. Persons whose backs, spines, or necks are bad or 
stiff should practice very gently. 

3. Pregnant woman are advised to cease all 
strenuous and inverted poses, and not to lie on their 
bellies. 

4. Inverted postures (e.g., shoulder stands, head 
stands) are life threatening to persons with heart 
problems, and should not be practiced by anyone with 
pressure problems (e.g., ear, nose, head, heart). 


5. The yoga room is to be pleasant, clean, 
ventilated, and free of drafts. 

6. It is always best to learn positions from a 
qualified yoga teacher. 

7. Yoga is first learned in the spring or fall; starting 
a course of yoga during winter or summer may 
cause health imbalances. 

8. The practice of moderation and healthfulness in 
diet prevents health imbalances. Foods that are 
difficult to digest, stale, very hot, or cold are not 
recommended. 

9. Yoga is not to be practiced on a completely empty 
stomach, nor on a full stomach. Beginners are advised 
to take a little boiled milk and ghee before practicing 
prdndydma. 

Part 1 

Postures (Asanas) 

Eighty-four million seated asanas exist, as de¬ 
scribed by Lord Shiva. Of them 84 are best, and of 
these, 32 are useful for mankind. 

Gherand Samhitd: Ch. 2; verse 1 
Hatha Yoga Pradlpika: Ch. 1; verse 33 

Of these 32, four were chosen as the best; 
siddhasana (perfect), padmasana (lotus), 
simhdsana (lion), bhadradsana (gracious pose). 
Hatha Yoga Pradlpika: Ch. 1; verse 34 

[The Shiva Samhitd lists siddhasana, padmasana, 
paschimottandsana (back stretch), and swastikdsana 
(auspicious) poses. Goraksha Satarka says only two 
poses are best; siddhasana and padmasana.] 

Siddhasana is the most important 
of the asanas. It should always 
be practiced as it purifies 
the 72,000 ndclls. 

Hatha Yoga Pradlpika: Ch. 1; verse 38-9 

When perfection is attainable 

through siddhasana, what is 
the use of practicing 
many other asanas ? 

Hatha Yoga Pradlpika: Ch. 1; verse 41 










Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 9: Hatha Yoga, Pranayama, Nada, Mudra, Bandha 


This last question relates to asanas as a prepara¬ 
tion for deeper meditative practice. From the point of 
view of Ayurvedic health, the various postures help 
heal specific health concerns. To that end this chap¬ 
ter describes some of the most effective asanas for 
healing various diseases. 

1. Siddhasana (Perfection Pose) 



SIDDHASANA (MALE—PALMS UP) 


This is the most important of the postures. Men 
practice this posture while women follow its coun¬ 
terpart, Siddha Yoni Asana (see below). 

Method: 

A) Sit comfortably 

B) Place the left heel at the perineum (or anal 
aperture). 

C) Place the right heel directly over the left heel, 
pressing against the root of the generative organ. 
(Traditionally the upper heel would press at the 
root of the generative organ, at the pubis root). 

D) Push the toes and the edge of the right foot 
between the left thigh and calf muscles. 

E) Sit comfortably, steady, with spine erect. 

F) Lower the chin towards the collarbone, relaxing 
the head (today some practice with the head 
upright and eyes closed). 


G) Gaze into the ajnd chakra (third eye). [When the 
eyes become tired, close them and gaze at the space 
in front of the eyes.] 

H) Place the hands in the ‘Jhyan mudra ’. (The tips of 
the thumb and index fingers touch, forming a circle 
with the fingers. The three remaining fingers remain 
outstretched or uncurled—palms face upward.) This 
hand position is said to prevent the energy from 
flowing out of the body via the fingers. Alternatively, 
one practices the ‘Chin Mudra ’. (Place the tips of the 
index finger at the root of the thumbs, and place the 
palms on the knees.) 


1A. Siddha Yoni Asana 



SIDDHA YONI ASANA 


This method is practiced by women; the pose is 
almost identical to siddhasana. 

Method: 

A) The heels press against the lower and upper 
areas of the reproductive organ. B) The toes of both 
feet are inserted between the thighs and calf 
muscles. C-H) See siddhasana. 

Spiritual Benefits of Both Poses: 

1. Stimulates the ajhci chakra (develops pure 
consciousness). 

2. Controls nervous and pranic energies from the 
muladhara and swadishtan chakras. 










The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


3. Balances one’s energy level by equalizing mental 
and pranic forces. 

4. Pressing the heels at the perineum prevents the 
kundalinl shakti (life-force) from escaping out of the 
muladhara chakra. 

5. Pressing the heels at the perineum stimulates the 
muladhara where the three major nadls (Ida, pihgala, 
sushumna) originate. 

6. These postures purify the sushumna. 

7. Electrical impulses flow up to the brain, purifying 
nadls, and removing all internal blocks. 

8. The three bandhas (contractions) automatically 
occur (Mula Bandha —contraction of the perineum; 
Uddlyana Bandha —contraction of the lower 
abdomen; Jalandhara Bandha —contraction of the 
neck [chin lock]). These bandhas accumulate greater 
pranic energy supply in the body. They are discussed 
in detail later in this chapter. 

9. The poses lead to Self-Realization. 

Organs Helped: Stomach, gall bladder, liver, spleen, 
kidneys (i.e., blood purifying organs). 

Phvsical/Mental Benefits: Heals nervous depression, 
balances blood pressure, cardiac function, and, in 
men, male hormones (testosterone). These postures 
maintain inner body temperature and redirect pranic 
energy upwards, activating the sushumna by 
balancing the kid and pihgala. 

Bandha Benefits: 

Mula: Removes senility, creates equilibrium of prop 
and apdn (life fluid and lower fluid). 

Ucldiyana: Purifies the breath and its channels. (This 
can be practiced alone by fully emptying the stomach 
and contracting the navel towards the spine.) 
Jalandhara: The flow of nectar from the sahasrdra 
(top or crown chakra) is consumed by the sun (fire) 
at the navel chakra. Jalandhara checks the flow so 
the fire cannot consume the nectar. This results in 
mesmerized sadhana. 

Doshas: All; especially P- (reducing) 

Alternatives: With slight variation of the feet and legs, 
Siddhasana is also called Vajrdsana, Muktdsana, and 
Guptdsana. They are presented here for consideration. 
Vajrdsana (thunderbolt)—kneel and place the 

& 


buttocks between the heels, with the right big toe 
overlapping the left one. 

Muktdsana (liberation)—place the left heel under 
the anus and the right heel on top of the left. 

Guptdsana (secret)—place the feet between the 
thigh and calf muscles so that the heels press against 
the anus. 


2. Padmasana (Lotus Pose) 



PADMASANA (LOTUS POSE) 


This is a more difficult posture. Fortunately it is 
not considered as important as Siddhasana. 

Method: 

A) Place the right foot on the left thigh and the left 
foot on the right thigh (soles facing up). B) If possible, 
cross hands behind the back and firmly hold the toes. 

C) Press the chin against the chest and keep the back 
straight. 

D) If toes cannot be held from behind the back, place 
hands in jhydn, chin, bhairava, or yoni muclrd. 
Bhairavi (females)—place fingers of left hand on the 
top of fingers of the right hand, with both palms facing 
up, and hands placed in the lap. Bhairava (males)— 
finger placement is the exact opposite of bhairavi. 
Yoni mudra —the last three fingers are interlaced, 
while the index and thumb fingers join at the tips. 

Xk 



















Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 9: Hatha Yoga, Pranayama, Nada, Mudra, Bandha 



Thumbs point upward, while the index fingers point 
forward (forming a triangular space between the index 
and thumb fingers). See photo below 
E) Eyes focus on the tip of the nose (nasakagra 
drishti). Alternatively, one can lean forward, 
eventually resting the forehead on the ground. F) The 
tongue is pressed against the root of the upper teeth. 
G) Slowly raise prana upward. 


kidneys, and liver; changes the metabolic structure 
and brain patterns, creating balance in the entire 
system. 

Precautions: Do not practice with sciatica or sacral 
infection. 

Doshas: All 


The yogi who, seated in padmasana, 
inhales through the entrance of the ncidls and 
fills them with prana, gains liberation; 
there is no doubt. 

Hatha Yoga Pradlpika 


Alternative: Raised Lotus 


JNYAN MUDRA 


RAISED LOTUS 


Benefits: Padmasan is the destroyer of all diseases, 
balancing prana and mental forces. It also tones sacral 
and coccygeal nerves through increased blood flow. 
Blood flows to the abdominal region, helping with 
mental, emotional, and nervous disorders. Leaning 
forward helps constipation, depression, wrinkles, 
headaches, and menstrual disorders. 


A) Sitting in full lotus, palms are placed on the floor 
beside the thighs. 

B) Inhale and raise the body off the floor; breathe 
naturally. 

C) Exhale and return to the floor. 

Benefits: This posture strengthens the reproductive 
system. 


O rgans Helped: Reproductive organs 

Organs Helped: This pose stimulates acupuncture § 0 we see seV eral reasons why Siddhasana is the 
meridians of the stomach, gall bladder, spleen, 


YONI MUDRA 


Method: 












The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


posture preferred over Padmasana. The former re¬ 
quires less work and mental concentration (i.e., the 
banclhas occur automatically due to the heel pres¬ 
sure, lower abdomen pressure, and the neck-lock; and 
prevents kundalinl energy from escaping while auto¬ 
matically increasing prana). Thus, one can more eas¬ 
ily engage in mantra meditation while sitting in 
Siddhasana; Padmasana requires more thought and 
practice. 


induced from bending forward. This pose is best per¬ 
formed outside, facing the sunrise. 

Benefits: This pose is beneficial for singers and speak¬ 
ers; sore throats, Kapha sinus headaches. 

Organs Helped: Ears, nose, throat, and mouth 
disorders. 

Doshas: All; especially Kapha 


3. Simhasana (Lion’s Pose) 


Variation: Seated Simhasana 



SIMHASANA 

Method: (Feet and ankles must be very flexible to per¬ 
form this pose) 

A) Sit on crossed an kl es 

B) Press the left heel on the right side of the 
perineum—males; right side of the reproductive or¬ 
gan—females. 

C) Press the right heel on the opposite side of the 
perineum or organ. 

D) Place palms on knees and spread fingers apart. 

E) Lean the head forward with chin almost touching 
the collar bone. 

F) Focus the eyes on the tip of the nose. 

G) Open the mouth (i.e., as if yawning), extending 
the tongue as far out as possible . 

The position of the feet induces a natural prac¬ 
tice of mula bandha due to the pressure on the 
perineum or generative organ. The bent head stimu¬ 
lates the neck lock (jalandhara). Uddlyana bandha is 


SEATED SIMHASANA 


Method: 

A) Separate knees and lean on them. 

B) Place the right foot under the right buttock and the 
left foot under the left buttock. 

C) Seat the buttocks between the heels. 

D) Hands can rest on the knees or on the ground be¬ 
tween the heels; palms facing down and fingers point¬ 
ing in towards the body. Put pressure on the balls of 
the palms. 

E) Raise the chin two or three inches and gaze at the 
third eye ( djhd chakra )—this is known as Shdmbhavl 
Mudra. 

F) Extend the tongue out as far as comfortable. 

G) Inhale deeply through the nose. Exhale, making a 
roaring sound like a lion (“aaahhhh”). 












Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 9: Hatha Yoga, Pranayama, Nada, Mudra, Bandha 


H) Move the tongue from side to side to stimulate 
the throat further. 

4. Bhadrasana (Gracious Pose) 

This posture, though an important pose, will not 
be discussed; it is a more difficult, advanced posture. 

5. Swastikasana (Auspicious Pose) 



SWASTIKASANA (PERFECT POSE) 


Method: 

A) Sit cross-legged and bring feet up between the 
thigh and calf muscles. (Beginners—place pillows 
under the feet to keep the feet propped to stay inside 
the thigh and calf muscles.) 

B) Place hands in jnyan or chin mudra. 

C ) Sit up straight and comfortable. 

Benefits: Nculls (actual acupuncture meridians) in¬ 
side the back of the legs are stimulated. The sciatic 
nerve is gently massaged; lumbar region and abdomi¬ 
nal muscles are toned, and the inner body tempera¬ 
ture is balanced. In Vedic culture the swastika is the 
symbol of fertility, creativity, and auspiciousness; 
therefore, practicing this posture develops these at¬ 
tributes. It dispels miseries and stabilizes the mind 
and body. Breath is quickly controlled by this pos¬ 
ture. 


Doshas: All; especially Vayu and Pitta 

6. Paschimottanasana (Ugrasana) 
(Back-stretching Pose) 



(PASCHIMOTTANASANA (BACK-STRETCHING POSE) 


Method: 

A) Stretch both legs straight out in front of the body. 

B) Inhale and raise hands over head, keeping the back 
straight. 

C) Exhale and bend forward from the hips, stretching 
the hands out towards the toes (if toes can be 
comfortably touched or held, do so. Otherwise, feel 
a sense of completeness regardless of how far you 
can stretch—e.g., holding knees, calf muscles, etc.). 
The spinal cord should feel stretched. The back should 
be straight—not curved or hunched. One may use a 
towel or rope around the toes to begin to sit properly. 

D) Place the forehead on the knees if comfortably 
reached. Keep the knees on the floor. 

E) Breathe normally, concentrating on the navel or 
on a mantra. 

F) Inhale and gently raise the arms up over the head 
while sitting upright. G) Exhale and bring the hands 
to the knees. 

Benefits: Increases digestive power, physical lassitude 
vanishes; the breath is soon controlled and miseries 
are dispelled, diabetes. Prana enters the sushumnci 
(the western or inner path). 

Precautions: Practice other postures first to loosen 
the back’s muscles and nerves; and the hamstrings 
and spine. 

Doshas: All; also for Kapha sinus headaches. 













The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Alternative 1: 

Maha Mudra (Great Sealing Pose) 


Alternative 2: 

Maha Bandha (Great Lock Pose) 



MAHA MUDRA (GREAT SEALING POSE) 


Method: 

A) The left heel is pressed against the anus; the sole 
is pressed against the right inner thigh (or vice versa). 

B) Inhale, raising the hands over the head. The spine 
is erect. 

C) Exhale and lean forward, hands grasping the knees, 
calves, or feet of the outstretched leg. Beginners may 
use a towel or belt for help. 

D) The forehead should be close to the outstretched 
knee; touching it if possible. 

E) Inhale, raising the hands over the head and sitting 
up straight. 

F) Exhale, lowering the hands to the knees. 



MAHA BANDHA (GREAT LOCK POSE) 


Method: 

A) One leg is extended (as in Maha mudra); the other 
leg is placed on the extended thigh. 

B) The stomach is fil led with air, while in Jalandhara 
pose, and the breath is held. 

C) Air is slowly exhaled when air can no longer be 
comfortably retained. 

Benefits: The life breath enters the sushumna. The 
body becomes robust. Bones and ribs are strength¬ 
ened. 


Doshas: VP-; Best for Vayu 


Alternative 3: Maha Bheda 


Benefits: Bindu (semen or ovum) is kept from mov¬ 
ing downward; physical lassitude is removed, physi¬ 
cal ailments are healed; digestion is increased. The 
body becomes charming, symptoms of aging are dis¬ 
pelled, senses become controlled. Wasting diseases, 
s ki n diseases, hemorrhoids, indigestion, tumors, and 
abscesses are healed. 


Method: 

A) While in the Mahabandha pose, hold the breath 
and practice uddiyana bandha (contraction of ab¬ 
dominal muscles). 

B) The hands gently strike into the lower armpit 
area. 











Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 9: Hatha Yoga, Pranayama, Nada, Mudra, Bandha 




VIRASANA (HERO’S POSE) 

Method: 

A) Sit on the left heel. Bend the right knee, placing 
the right foot by the left knee. 

B) Place the right elbow on the right knee and the 
palm against the right cheek. 


VISASANA 

Method: 

A) Sit on the left heel, while the right foot rests on 
top of the left thigh. Knees are spread wide apart. 
Optional—place the big toe under the buttock. 

B) Optional—keep hands in the jnyan or chin mudra. 

Benefits: This pose heals rheumatism, hemorrhoids, 


MAH A BHEDA 

Benefits: The life breath enters the sushumna, 
leaving the idci and pihgald ndclls. The three knots 
are penetrated and kundalini shakti proceeds to the 
sahasrdra (crown chakra) uninterrupted. Breath is 
controlled and old age weaknesses are removed. 


7. Yirasana (Hero’s Pose) 


C) Place the left palm on the left knee. 

D) Close eyes and concentrate on the breath. 

Benefits: This posture develops the heroic power of 
Hanuman (monkey god; Mahavlr). It increases will 
power and strengthens the body. The pose is also ex¬ 
cellent for immune disorders like AIDS, MS, Epstein 
Barr, etc. 

O rgans Helped: The pose stabilizes the energy flow 
to the reproductive organs and controls sexual en¬ 
ergy; it also stimulates the reproductive organs and 
their associated brain centers (this is achieved by ac¬ 
tivating the ndclls found in the legs and connected to 
the reproductive glands). 

Doshas: VP- 


8. Visasana (Alternative to Vlrasana) 














The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


and other diseases of the anus. 


9. Bhujangasana (Serpent Pose) 



BHUJANGASANA (SERPENT POSE) 


Method: 

A) Lie on the stomach with hands parallel to the shoul¬ 
ders and palms placed on the floor. 

B) Inhale, gently raising the head and upper torso up 
(lifting with the back muscles, not the hands). The 
lower torso and legs remain on the ground (navel to 
toes). The head is upright and the back is curved. 

C) Exhale, gently lowering the body to the floor. 

Benefits: Kundalinl is raised, digestion is increased, 
diseases are healed. Asthma, gastrointestinal disor¬ 
ders, hypertension, menstrual disorders, and insom¬ 
nia are relieved. 

Dashas: VPK= 


10. Shalabhasana (Locust Pose) 



SHALABHASANA (LOCUST POSE) 


Method: 

A) Both arms are placed on the ground (palms facing 
up) while the head is placed on them. (Some 


practitioners place the hands beside the shoulders under 
the chest (palms down). 

B) Inhale, raising legs off the ground. Contract the 
buttocks muscles and stretch the thigh muscles. The 
back and stomach muscles are doing the lifting, not 
the hands and head. 

C) Breathe naturally; if the body begins to tremble, 
the posture is being held too long. 

D) Exhale, gently lowering the legs to the ground. 

Benefits: This pose improves digestion and heals 
physical weaknesses. The sun-fire at the navel that 
draws the nectar flow from the crown is blocked. This 
removes the effects of old age; thus retaining a 
youthful appearance. The posture is good for 
malabsorption, the gastrointestinal system, and sore 
throats. 

Doshas: VK- 


11. Vajroh Mudra (Thunderbolt Pose) 



VAJROLI MUDRA (THUNDERBOLT POSE) 


Method: 

A) Begin in Shalabhasana, then place the palms on 
the ground beside the shoulders or under the thighs. 

B) Lift the head and upper torso into the air by press¬ 
ing the hands to the ground. Feel a gentle pressure in 
the small of the back, urinary tract, and reproductive 
organs. 

C) The legs are also lifted as in Shalabhasana. 



















Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 9: Hatha Yoga, Pranayama, Nada, Mudra, Bandha 


Benefits: Semen/ovum (bindu) is prevented from 
being discharged; the power to retain this fluid is 
developed, enhancing long life. The Gherand 
Samhitci says this pose is one of the best because it 
develops liberation. 


Organs Helped: Urinary tract, reproductive organs. 
Doshas: All 


12. Dhanurasana (Bow Pose) 

This is similar to Vajroll, but the hands are kept 
off the ground. 

Method: 

Beginner: Half Bow 


A) Lie flat on the stomach, forehead on the ground, 
and arms by your sides. 

B) Inhale, bending knees; then grasp both ankles. 

C) Separate the knees and exhale. 

D) If the body begins rocking, it is all right. 

E) Exhale, slowly while lowering the body and limbs 
to the ground. 

Advanced: Bow —same as above only 




DHANURASANA (BEGINNER’S HALF BOW) 


DHANURASANA (ADVANCED BOW) 


A) Lie on the stomach, forehead resting on the ground 
and arms straight overhead. 

B) Inhale, raising the arms and legs straight up, using 
the lower back and buttocks muscles. Breathe nor¬ 
mally. 

C) Exhale, slowly lowering limbs to the ground. Note 
that a slow release tones muscle groups that would 
not normally be toned if one were just to drop the 
limbs. 


Intermediate: Bow 



D) Inhale, slightly raising the knees, head, and chest 
simultaneously, while pulling the feet away and up 
from the hands (the whole body should be moving 
together at one time). Breathe naturally. Concentrate 
on the back of the neck (vishuddha chakra), on the 
abdominal area (manipura chakra), or on the mid¬ 
point where the back is bent. 


DHANURASANA (INTERMEDIATE BOW) 


Benefits: This pose alleviates diabetes and chest ail¬ 
ments; it produces cortisone in the adrenal glands (for 
inflammatory, allergic, or excess tissue or tumor 
growth); adjusts the vertebrae, and straightens 
hunched back and drooping shoulders. The posture 
regulates the menstrual cycle and corrects infertility 
(if not due to deformed reproductive organs—i.e., if 
not hormonally caused); helps Kapha—asthma, 
Pitta—hemorrhoids, colitis, hypertension (half bow), 
rheumatism; Vayu—arthritis. This is one of the best 
postures for all digestive disorders. All the nadis run 
through the navel. The navel becomes uncentered if 
a person lifts heavy items with only one arm. This 
creates a disturbance in the flow 













The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


of the nadis, and causes digestive troubles. Three 
minutes of practicing the bow pose (along with two 
other poses discussed on page 310) realigns the navel 
within three days. Signs of proper digestion will be 
noticed immediately thereafter. [See page 309: how 
to test for navel displacement]. 

Organs Helped: This pose stimulates the solar plexus, 
digestive, elimination, and reproductive organs; 
massages the heart, liver, and pancreas; stimulates 
the kidneys and tones the alimentary canal. It regulates 
the endocrine glands (especially the thyroid and 
adrenals). 


Doshas: All 


13. Matsyendrasana (Spinal Twist Pose) 



MATSYENDRASANA (SPINAL TWIST POSE) 


Method: Begi nner 

A) Fully extend the right foot. Cross the left foot over 
the right knee, placing it on the ground next to the 
knee. 

B) The right arm rests against the outer left leg. The 
hand is placed on the right knee or on the floor by the 
left side of the body. 

C) The left arm is wrapped around the back, or the 
palm is placed on the floor behind the left buttock. 

D) Inhale, gently and slowly rotating the spine and 
head as far to the left as comfortable. The position is 
held with the hands or with the stomach and back 
muscles. Breathe naturally. 

E) Exhale, gently and slowly releasing the pose, and 


return to the starting position. 

F) Repeat in the reverse position. 

Precautions: It is very important not to strain the spine 
or neck in this pose; especially for those with bad 
backs or necks. Remember, once hurt from a yoga 
pose, healing takes a very long time. 


Alternate: Pashasana (Chord Pose) 



PASHASANA (CHORD POSE) 


Method: Beginner 

A) Squat on the floor (keeping the soles and heels 
flatly on the ground). Knees and feet are close 
together. Achieve a balanced squat. 

B) Twist the trunk until the right arm reaches around 
the outside of the left knee. The right shoulder touches 
the left outer knee or thigh. 

C) With hands or fingers on the floor, exhale; gently 
continue the twist as far as the arms will reach. Hold 
this position while breathing naturally. 

D) Release the posture, exhaling and slowly 
untwisting to the starting position. E) Repeat the pose, 
twisting in the opposite direction. 

Benefits: This poses strengthens the ankles, making 
them more elastic; it helps to release gas, to tone, and 
to help people who stand on their feet all day. 

Both poses improve spine agility, strengthen the 

















Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 9: Hatha Yoga, Pranayama, Nada, Mudra, Bandha 


shoulders, reduce abdominal fat, massage abdominal 
organs, expand the chest; help diabetes, and improve 
digestion. 

Organs Helped: Liver, spleen, pancreas sluggishness. 
Doshas: All 


Intermediate: Ardha Matsyendrasana 



ARDHA MATSYENDRASANA 


Method: 

A) Bend the right foot by the side of the left buttock 
(i.e., left leg is crossed over the right knee). The right 
foot is in front of the left knee; the left knee is raised 
near the chest. 

B) With the right hand grab the toes of the left foot, 
ankle, knee, or floor. Place the left hand around the 
back; or place the palm on the floor by the left side. 

C) Inhale; gently and slowly rotate the spine and head 
to the left as far as is comfortable. The hands can 
hold the position, or the position can be held with the 
stomach and back muscles. Breathe naturally. 

D) Exhale, gently and slowly untwisting the torso to 
its original position. 

E) Repeat the pose in the reverse direction. 


strengthens the digestive fire (agni) and improves nu¬ 
trient absorption. It prevents the crown-moon nectar 
(neurohormones of the pituitary and pineal glands that 
activate the endocrine glands) from being burnt up by 
the navel-sun heat. Thus, diseases of old age and death 
are prevented or slowed. This nectar is associated with 
the bindu (semen/ovum). The navel or manipura 
chakra is powered by Samaria Vayu. This is respon¬ 
sible for nutrient and prana absorption from food and 
air. This absorbs Prana Vayu as well. Through this 
pose Apdna Vayu and Prana Vayu are made to meet 
at the manipura chakra. They are combined, ener¬ 
gized, and then moved into the sushumna nacli. The 
lower (animal) energies and the higher spiritual ener¬ 
gies are united, and kundalini is awakened. 

This dsana relieves diabetes, constipation, 
indigestion, urinary problems, nerve and nervous 
conditions; lumbago, rheumatism, slipped discs. 

Organs Helped: Pancreas, liver, spleen, stomach, 
ascending and descending colon; the pose tones nerve 
roots, adjusts and realigns the vertebral column; back 
muscles are pulled and stretched. 


Doshas: All 


Benefits: This pose channels prana (kundalini), awak¬ 
ening the chakras and the sushumna ncicli. The pos¬ 
ture also stimulates the navel or manipura chakra. 
This maintains the body, harmonizes underactive or 
overactive functions, and removes sluggishness and 
diseases arising from this condition. The pose 

























The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


14. Gomukhasana (Cow’s Face Pose) 




GOMUKHASANA (COW’S FACE POSE) 

All the ancient texts agree on this posture—except 
the final arm position. 

Method: 

A) While seated, bend the legs so that the right heel 
touches the left buttock and the left heel touches the 
right buttock (the left leg is crossed over the right leg 
and the left knee is over the right knee). 

B) Bring the left arm up behind the head and back. 
The right arm wraps around the side and back. The 
left elbow points straight up (towards the sky), and 
the right elbow points towards the ground. Clasp the 
hands behind the back. 

C) Breathe naturally and hold the posture. The eyes 
can be open or closed, or practicing shambhavi mudra 
(staring at the third eye). 

D) Release and repeat, reversing the leg and arm po¬ 
sitions. 

Method: Beginner 

A) After legs are positioned as above, palms may be 
placed on the upper knee, one hand on top of the 
other. 

B) Some people press the hands on the knees to stretch 
the leg’s muscles. Optionally, one can lean forward, 
the forehead, if possible, resting on the floor. 


Benefits: This pose tones the shoulder muscles, 
nerves, and cardiac plexus (blood and lymphatic ves¬ 
sels in the heart region). Nadis in the legs stimulate 
the reproductive organs and glands, and regulate hor¬ 
mone secretion. The vajra ncidl is stimulated, pre¬ 
venting the outward flow of prana. Thus, prana ac¬ 
cumulates at the mulaclhara (first) chakra. The 
interlinking of the fingers prevents the prana from 
escaping through the hands. This causes energy to 
flow through the spinal region. Persons will notice 
the arms forming an infinity sign that balances the 
higher and lower (positive and negative) prana. 

Organs Helped: Reproductive organs and glands, 
heart. 

Doshas: All 


15. Kurmasana (Tortoise 
Pose) 

Method: 

A) Cross the legs and sit 
on the ankles, pressing 
them firmly on the anus. 
Keep the knees as close 
together as comfortable. 
Toes point outward to¬ 
wards the sides. 

Vi 



BEGINNER GOMUKHASANA (COW’S FACE POSE) 











Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 9: Hatha Yoga, Pranayama, Nada, Mudra, Bandha 


B) Sit up straight; palms rest on their respective knees. 

C) The body is balanced; weight is on the ankles, 
heels, and sides of feet. 

Benefits: This pose straightens the curvature of the 
spine. The ankles or heels press the anus, closing the 
vajra nacll, preventing kundalinl energy from escap¬ 
ing. This pose is useful for both celibates and family 
members. It channels sexual energy to the higher 
chakras; it also regulates the sex glands, as well as 
the reproductive and excretory organs. 

Organs Helped: Reproductive, excretory, visceral 
organs (nadls in the side of the feet are stimulated— 
i.e., thorax, abdomen, heart, liver, intestines, and kid¬ 
neys). 

Doshas: All 


16. Kukkutasana (Cockerel Pose) 



KUKKUTASANA (COCKEREL POSE) 


Method: 

A) Sit in Padmasana (lotus pose) and insert hands 
between the thighs and knees (right hand between 
the right thigh and calf; left hand between the left 


thigh and calf). 

B) Place the palms on the ground, fingers pointing 
forward. 

C) Inhale, shifting the body weight to the hands and 
raising the body off the ground. 

D) Hold the position and breathe normally. Focus 
the eyes on a fixed point in front of you. 

E) Exhale, slowly returning to the ground. 

Benefits: The pose awakens kundalinl, strengthens 
the wrists, arms, shoulder muscles, and abdominal 
walls. 

Doshas: All 


17. Back Bends 

Various styles of back bends exist. Beginning poses 
are discussed below. 

Kapotasana (Pigeon Pose) 



KAPOTASANA (PIGEON POSE) 

Method: Beginner-Advanced Beginner 

A) Place both hands and knees on the floor (i.e., like 
a cat). 

B) Lift the hands and stand upright from the knees. 
Place the right big toe over the left big toe. 

C) Move the arms behind the back, extended between 
the right thigh and calf; left hand between the left 
thigh and calf toward the heels). 

D) Exhale, leaning the body backward until the palms 













The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


reach the heels. Then grab the heels (or touch them 
with the fingers). 

E) Breathe normally and hold the posture. 

F) Exhale, returning the torso to the upright position. 

Precaution: Do not hurt the knees or spine. 

Alternative: 

A) Sit on the knees. Exhale, slowly lean backwards 
while resting on the elbows. Eventually you can rest 
your back on the floor. 



KAPOTASANA (PIGEON POSE) ALTERNATIVE 


Benefits: These poses tone the spinal region, circulate 
blood around the spine, and stretch the pelvic region 
and lower back. The heart is massaged and healed; 
the diaphragm is lifted, and the chest is expanded. 
Kapha—diabetes, bronchitis; Vayu—insomnia, 
rheumatoid arthritis, varicose veins, sciatica, 
reproductive organs, constipation, asthma, backache. 

Organs Helped: Reproductive, diaphragm, heart. 
Doshcis: All; especially VK- 

Standing Bow 

Method: 

A) Stand erect, 
arms at sides; 
breathe easily. 

B) Bend elbows, 
bringing the 
palms together at 
the chest in prayer 
position. 


C) Slowly raise the hands up over the head (the arms 
cover the ears). Notice the rhythm of your breathing. 

D) Inhale, slowly bending from the lower back; 
leaning backwards as far as is comfortable. Keep 
hands and arms in the same position at the head. 

E) Exhale, slowly bringing the upper torso upright. 

F) Slowly lower the “prayer hands” to the chest; then 
return the hands to the sides. 

Precaution: Extreme care is required; especially if 
persons have a bad back or neck. 

Benefits: This pose stretches the lower back and 
kidney area 

Doshcis: All 


Urdhva Dhanurasana (Upward Bow) 



URDHVA DHANURASANA (UPWARD BOW) 


Method: Advanced Beginner 

A) Lie on the back, bend knees. Soles of the feet are 
on the floor, and knees are together. 

B) Arms are raised over the head with elbows facing 
the sky. The palms are on the ground, fingers facing 
the shoulders (hands are shoulder-width distance 
apart). 

C) Exhale, raising the trunk and crown of the head 
off the floor. 

D) Rest and breathe in this position. 



STANDING BOW 


















Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 9: Hatha Yoga, Pranayama, Nada, Mudra, Bandha 


E) Exhale, lifting the trunk and head further, arching 
the back so the weight is completely on the palms 
and soles (never put pressure on the head and neck). 
Breathe naturally. 

F) Stretch the arms from the shoulders and the legs 
from the thighs. 

G) Eventually the elbows are straight and the thighs 
are stretched. 

H) Exhale and stretch some more, pulling the thigh 
muscles by lifting the heels off the floor. 

I) Extend the chest, stretching up the sacral region of 
the spine until the abdomen is taut; then lower the 
heels to the floor again. Hold the pose for some time. 

J) Exhale, gently lowering the body to the floor again. 

Benefits: This pose stretches and tones the spine, 
making the body alert and supple; strengthens the 
back, arms, and wrists; soothes the head, and pro¬ 
motes vitality, lightness, and energy. 

Doshas: All 


Setu Bandha Sarvangasana (Bridge Pose) 



SETU BANDHA (BRIDGE POSE) 

Method: Setu means bridge 

A) Lie on the back with knees bent and the soles of 
the feet on the floor. 

B) Exhale, raising the buttocks off the floor. 

C) With elbows resting on the ground, place the palms 
on the small of the back, supporting the weight of the 
body. (A stretch should be felt in the small of the 
back.) 

D) Optional—legs may then be extended straight 


out for further back-bending benefits. 

E) Breathe easily while holding the position. 

F) Inhale, lifting the buttocks. Remove the hands, 
exhale and gently lower the body to the ground. 

Benefits: The spine flexes backwards and neck strain 
is removed. The result is a healthy, flexible spine and 
nervous system. 

Doshas: All 


18. Salamba Sarvangasana (Shoulder Stand) 



SALAMBHA SARVANGASANA (SHOULDER STAND) FIGURE 1 



SALAMBHA SARVANGASANA (SHOULDER STAND) FIGURE 2 













The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Method: 

A) Lie flat on the back, legs completely extended, 
knees together, hands at the sides, palms down. 

B) Relax, take a few deep breaths; then inhale, raising 
the knees to the thighs. 

C) Exhale, raising the hips from the floor. Brace the 
buttocks with your hands, while your elbows remain 
on the floor, supporting the buttocks. (Alternatively, 
cross legs and grab toes; then pull legs up to the head. 
This is an easy way to elevate the lower trunk. Then 
place the palms on the buttocks.) 

D) Exhale, raising the lower trunk to a 45 angle with 
palms supporting the buttocks; or to a 90 degree angle 
(perpendicular) to the floor by walking the palms to 
the lower back. 

E) Exhale, raising the legs and keeping them aligned 
with the trunk of the body; toes pointing to the sky. 

F) The chin is locked into the chest. 

G) Breathe naturally in this position. 

H) Exhale, sliding the hands to the buttocks as the 
body begins to lower. Slowly return the body to the 
starting position. 

Precaution: This pose must not be practiced by 
anybody with a heart problem, high blood pressure, 
or any other pressure (e.g., sinus, ear). 

Immediately after this pose, practice the fish pose 
(Matsyasana), or the serpent or cobra pose 
(Bhujahgasana ). 

Always eat enough food daily, as this pose 
increases the digestive fire (agni); but do not eat for 
at least one hour before asanas. 

Elderly persons are advised not to perform this pose 
unless they have practiced it throughout adulthood. 


system of toxins, restores energy, hides gray hair and 
wrinkles after six months; develops vitality, 
happiness, confidence, joy, strengthens digestion, 
increases appetite, for convalescing. 

O rgans Helped: Endocrine organs or ductless glands, 
thyroid, parathyroid, pituitary, pineal... all organs of 
the brain and body. 

Doshas: All 


19. Halasana (Plough) 



HALASANA (PLOUGH)—BEGINNERS 


This is an advanced variation of the shoulder stand, 
but beginners can do a preparatory version of this 
pose. 

Method: Beginner 

A) Lie on the back, exhale, and bring knees to the 
chest. 

B) Cross the an kl es and grab toes with the opposite 
hands. 

C) Exhale, pulling the feet over the head, taking care 
not to harm the spine. 


Benefits: This pose bathes all the organs and brain in 
blood; increases absorption of nutrients, secretes 
hormones for balancing body and brain; heals anemia, 
asthma, breathlessness, palpitations, emphysema, 
bronchitis, throat problems, headaches, colds, sinuses, 
congestion, nasal disturbances, irritation, constipation, 
urinary disorders, uterine displacement, menstrual 
troubles, hemorrhoids, hernia, arteriosclerosis, sexual 
debility, varicose veins, ulcers (stomach and 
intestinal), colitis, abdominal organ protrusion or pain; 
senility, dementia, epilepsy, anger, hate, irritability, 
short temper, insomnia; soothes nerves, frees the 














Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 9: Hatha Yoga, Pranayama, Nada, Mudra, Bandha 


D) Exhale, bringing the feet over the head, touching 
the ground (chin locked in the chest) if possible. 

E) Hold this pose or fully extend the legs. One leg at 
a time may be extended to begin to stretch the back 
and leg muscles. Palms are pressed against the middle 
or upper back. Breathe naturally. 

F) Inhale, slowly letting the hands and feet return to 
the original position. 


Method: Advanced 



HALASANA (PLOUGH)—ADVANCED 


A) From the shoulder stand, release the chin lock 
and gently lower the trunk slightly. 

B) Move the arms and legs over the head (either with 
bent knees or straightened legs (most advanced). 

C) Rest the toes on the floor. Breathe naturally. 

D) Tighten the knees by pulling the hamstring muscles 
at the back of the thighs and raise the trunk. 

E) Place palms in the middle of the back. Press the 
trunk to keep it perpendicular to the floor. 

F) Extend the hands behind the back (opposite the 
leg position), palms on the ground. 

G) Hook the thumbs and stretch the arms and legs. 

H) Interlock the fingers and turn the wrists so the 
thumbs rest on the floor. 

I) Stretch the palms and fingers, tighten the arms at 
the elbows, and pull them from the shoulders. 
(Stretching the arms in the opposite directions fully 
stretches the spine). 

J) Change the thumb that touches the ground from 
time to time; stretching the arms for an equal amount 
of time in each position. This develops harmonious 
elasticity of the shoulders. 

K) After a comfortable amount of time, release the 
hands, raise the legs back to the shoulder stand, and 
gently slide the legs back to the floor. 


Benefits: Same as the shoulder stand. Also, abdominal 
organs are rejuvenated, the spine receives extra blood 
to heal backache, hand cramps, stiff shoulders and 
elbows; arthritis, and lumbago. This pose creates 
lightness and mobility. 

Vayu—asthma, depression, sciatica, sexual 
debility, wrinkles, rheumatoid arthritis, headache, 
menstrual disorders, abdominal pain, and gas. 


Doshas: All; especially V- 


20. Matsyasana (Fish Pose) 



1V1A1 0 1 A5A1NA (FISH FUMi) 


Method: Beginner 

A) Lie on the back; inhale, raising the upper torso 
from the elbows (hands facing the feet, palms down). 

B) Arch the back and lean the head backwards, but 
keep it off the floor. 

C) Breathe easily and hold the posture, focusing on 
the lower back. 

D) Exhale, gently lowering the head and torso to the 
ground. 

Precaution: If the head is resting on the ground, the 
neck and spine can become strained. 






















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Method: Advanced: Lotus-Fish 


21. Jathara Parivartanasana (Belly Roll) 



MATSYASANA (LOTUS-FISH POSE) 

Start in lotus pose and lean on the elbows. Then 
arch the back and head. 

Or, in the lotus position, grasp toes and roll onto 
the back and elbows. Then, lower the feet, lifting the 
torso, using the elbows, and arching the back and 
head. 

Benefits: The chest is expanded, making breathing 
fuller and easier; stretches pelvic joints. Pitta—ab¬ 
sorption of nutrients, liver, thyroid, migraine. 

Kapha—sinus congestion and headaches; gastrointes¬ 
tinal disorders, asthma. 

Organs Helped: Liver, head, sinuses, lungs, gas¬ 
trointestinal tract, thyroid. 

Doshas: PK- 


JATHARA PARIVARTANASANA (BELLY ROLL) 

Jathara means belly, and parivartana means roll or 
turn. 

Method: Beginner 

A) Lie flat on the back with arms stretched sideways 
(parallel to the shoulders, resembling a cross). 

B) Inhale, lifting the left leg while keeping it straight, 
until it reaches 45 or 90 degrees above the floor. 
Breathe normally. 

C) Exhale, slowly crossing and lowering the left leg 
over the right side, trying to touch the floor. Keep the 
leg straight. Also, try to keep the back and shoulder 
flat on the floor. Breathe normally. 

D) Inhale, slowly lifting the leg back into the air. Hold, 
then exhale and slowly return to position A. Rest un¬ 
til breathing becomes normal again. 

E) Repeat with the right leg. 

Advanced 

A) Start in the 
same position as 
the beginners pose, 
only exhale and lift 
both legs to 45 or 
90 degrees above 
the floor. 

B) Follow the same 
instructions as in 
the beginner’s 
pose. 

Vi 























Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 9: Hatha Yoga, Pranayama, Nada, Mudra, Bandha 


Benefits: Reduces excess fat, tones liver, spleen, pan¬ 
creas, and removes sluggishness; heals gastritis and 
strengthens the intestines, trims all the abdominal 
organs, relieves sprains, and loosens the hip and lower 
back region. 

Doshcis: PK- 



22. Suryasana (Sun Pose) 

The sun pose is a combination of poses designed 
to heal, tone, and rejuvenate all aspects of the mind, 
body, and spirit. It originally was practiced at sun¬ 
rise, but can be done anytime of the day or night. It is 
a general pose that can be done by anyone. 


Step 2 

E) Exhale, bending the knees and squatting. Palms 
are placed outside the feet. One may hold this position 
as well. 

F) Inhale, sliding the right foot backward and extend¬ 
ing the leg until the knee is straight. The toes are bent 
and the heel is off the floor. The other foot is flat on 
the floor. The knee is parallel with the hands and the 
head directly over the bent knee, looking straight 
ahead. Arch the back with the chest closer to the 
ground. Hold this position and breathe naturally, feel¬ 
ing the stretch throughout the body, especially in the 
legs, back, and shoulders. [Fig. 3] 

G) Inhale, sliding the left foot back, beside the right 
foot. Set both heels on the floor, raising the buttocks 
and feeling a greater stretch in the legs, feet, and 
Ac hi lles tendons. One may remain in this position 
and breathe easily. [Fig. 4] 

H) Inhale, bending the knees until they rest on the 
floor; then rest the chest on the ground. The shoulders 
are parallel to the fingers (for beginners). 

I) Inhale, gently pushing the upper torso off the ground 
(cobra position). [Fig. 6] 


Method: 

Step 1 

A) Stand erect, arms at sides; breathe easily. 

B) Inhale, bending the elbows and bringing the palms 
together at the chest in prayer position. 

C) Slowly raise hands over the head. The arms are 
covering the ears (notice a natural breath occurring 
in the lungs). Slowly bend from the lower back, 
leaning backwards as far as is comfortable. Keep 
hands and arms in the same position around the head. 
[Fig. 1] 

D) Exhale, slowly bringing the upper torso upright. 
Slowly bring the hands back to the chest in the prayer 
pose; then return the hands to the sides. Slowly bend 
forward, letting the arms and head hang with the 
weight of gravity. Keep knees and legs straight (do 
not bend knees). If the fingers or hands touch the 
ground, fine, otherwise, allow the body to hang and 
relax. Breathe naturally. Feel gravity pulling the arms, 
hands, and face muscles; it releases all the tension 
from the face, shoulders, neck, arms, and hands. One 


may stay in this position as long as desirable. [Fig. 2^ 


Advanced option — inhale, lowering the head until it 
is parallel with the hands. Only the hands and feet 
touch the ground. Then arch the back. The chest is 
closer to the ground, the buttocks are in the air (a sort 
of ess shape) [Fig. 5]. Fike a snake, slither or pull the 
head and body forward past the hands, winding up in 
the cobra position (the upper torso is almost 
perpendicular to the floor. The head looks forward). 

J) Inhale, pushing the buttocks back into the air. The 
heels return to the floor as in position G. 


Step 3 

K) Inhale, sliding the right foot up to the chest. The 
toes are parallel with the fingers and the head faces 
forward. This is the reverse position from F, while 
the left heel comes off the floor. Arch the back (chest 
closer to the ground). Remain in this position and 
breath normally. [Fig. 7] F) Inhale, sliding the left 
foot next to the right foot (returning to the squatting 
position). Remain in this position and breathe 
naturally. M) Inhale, extending and raising the legs 










The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


and buttocks until the legs are straight. Simultaneously 
keep the upper torso bent forward (holding the feet 
and palms on the floor; or simply hanging, as 
mentioned before). Rest, breath, and let gravity pull 
the stress from the mind, face, and body. [Fig. 8] 

N) Bring the palms together in prayer position. In¬ 
hale, extending the arms straight out and raising them. 
This pulls the upper torso back into the upright posi¬ 
tion. 

O) Continue this motion, replicating the position of 
the arms and hands over the head (arms covering the 
ears), then leaning backwards again. [Fig. 9] 

P) Exhale, slowly bringing the arms and torso up¬ 
right again. Gently lower arms to the chest while the 
hands are still in prayer position. Release the hands 
and lower them to the sides of the body. 

Benefits: All the benefits of each individual posture 
mentioned earlier are incorporated in this pose. 

Doshas: All 


A 




SURYASANA 
(SUN POSE)—FIG. 1 


SURYASANA (SUN POSE)—FIG. 4 











Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 9: Hatha Yoga, Pranayama, Nada, Mudra, Bandha 




SURYASANA (SUN POSE)—FIG. 6 



SURYASANA (SUN POSE)—FIG. 7 

& 


SURYASANA (SUN POSE)—FIG. 8 



SURYASANA (SUN POSE)—FIG. 9 


23. Shavasana (Corpse Pose) 



SHAVASANA (CORPSE POSE) 


Method: 

A) Lie on the back with hands at the sides (palms 
facing up). Feet are stretched out and are slightly sepa- 









The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


rated. The body should be aligned. 


Vayu—asthma, depression, varicose veins, 
insomnia. Pitta—anger or hatred. 


B) Slowly inhale through the nose. Feel the cool air 
entering the muladhara chakra (base of spine). As it Doshas: All 
rises through the body, feel the air healing and sweep¬ 
ing away the toxins. 


C) Slowly exhale and feel the air going out the crown 
of the head, releasing toxins and tensions from the 
face, head, mind, neck, and shoulders. Repeat this 
process several times. 



Option 

D) Slowly inhale as above; then during exhalation, 
chant the mantra, ‘aum’. Feel the voice vibrating 
through the entire body. Repeat several times, as the 
vibration creates a deeper relaxation. 

E) Rest for 1 or more minutes, noticing your breath. 
Then let your mind drift where it may, or practice 
sadhana (meditation). 

Precaution: Although this seems like a simple pose, 
it is said to take 15 years to master the relaxation 
derived from it. Ending all yoga routines with this 
pose is imperative; otherwise, strain may occur while 
the body is adjusting to its new, healthier structure. 

Benefits: This posture is to be practiced by everyone 
as the last pose of the routine. Yoga asanas purify, 
heal, tone, and perform acupuncture on the body. Now 
the body must rest, restructure, and reorient itself to 
its new self. When this pose is completed, one will 
have developed a new mind, body, and spirit. The 
entire system is revitalized. 

The pose develops physical awareness and 
pratydhdra (withdrawal and liberation of the mind 
from the senses and objects—5 th stage of yoga). This 
posture also develops dharand (concentration or 
visualization of one’s deity—6th stage of meditation), 
and dhyana (holding or meditation on that image— 
7th stage of meditation). 

Shavdsana is also useful when practiced between 
asanas, and after a stressful day. This helps blood 
pressure, peptic ulcers, anxiety, hysteria, cancer, 
psychosomatic diseases, neuroses, realization of 
subconscious thoughts. 



Part 2 

Pranayama & Nada 

As discussed earlier, the life-breath (prdn or soul) 
saves the mind from the anxiety, nervousness, worry, 
fear, anger, impatience, hot temper, lethargy, agitation, 
and dullness. It improves concentration and memory, 
mental peace, and the delight of a silent, clear mind. 
The development of peace is synonymous with higher 
mental spiritual development. 

This is because thoughts are a vibration of the life- 
breath. If the vibration is stopped, the mind is saved. 
As the mind becomes free from thought, it remains 
centered in the higher Self of eternity or Divine peace 
and bliss. One may wonder, if there are no thoughts, 
does one becomes a robot or brainwashed? 
Brainwashing is a state of imposing a certain 
philosophy on the mind and locking it in place. This 
keeps the mind locked into a ‘specific-state’ activity; 
not a state of freedom and peace. In this state of mental 
silence one feels clear-headed enough to make 
responsible decisions, while maintaining a peaceful 
mind. 

Mental peace occurs when the life-breath ceases 
to flow in the ida and pihgald, and begins to flow in 
the sushumnd, resulting in stillness. The Vedic texts 
or scriptures suggest that the best way for this to occur 
is through the practice of meditation, as instructed 
by a true guru. Four initial stages of mental 
development exist. The mind, 

1) Is stuck in dullness, greed, and violence 

(tamas). 


2) Seeks excess chatter or activity, or it seeks empty 
■>snv 








Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 9: Hatha Yoga, Pranayama, Nada, Mudra, Bandha 


fame and fortune (lamas and rajas). 

3) Becomes conscientious, and wants knowledge, pi¬ 
ety, and prosperity; realizing there is more to life 
than material possessions (rajas). 

4) Becomes pure, kind, compassionate, clear, and 
happy. No trace of rajas exists (only sattwa ex¬ 
ists). This fourth or sattwic state is the first stage 
of samadhi or peace. The quiet mind is now ready 
to heai - the inner eternal calling. This eternal ex¬ 
perience is even more alluring than happiness 
gained sensory pleasure. Then, the mind under¬ 
goes two more stages of the development of higher 
consciousness. The mind, 

5) Becomes drawn towards the inner Divine attrac¬ 
tion and becomes absorbed in eternal bliss. No 

awareness of thoughts of the outer world exist 
(second stage of samadhi). 

5a) After this second stage of samadhi, one’s aware¬ 
ness returns (i.e., getting up from meditation), but 
some of that inner peacefulness remains. This 
peace develops as one continues to meditate. 

6) Full Self-Realization. This occurs when the sec¬ 
ond stage of samadhi remains, even when one is 
out of meditation. In this final stage of samadhi 
one sees the inner Self as Divine and eternal, and 
all people and things in life as that same Divine 
Self. One feels full compassion, peace, and eter¬ 
nal bliss. Activities and objects of the outer world 
no longer affect this eternal peace. One becomes 
the peace. Everything has become the peace. Thus, 
there is nothing that is ‘non-peace’. The relative 
workings of the mind are fully stopped, and the 
life-breath flows permanently and quietly through 
the entire sushumnci. 

Pranayama means stilling of the breath. Inhala¬ 
tion, exhalation, and breath retention, condition the 
breath to be still. Stillness of breath stills the mind. 
Pranayama cleanses the channels ( nadls) and energy 
centers (chakras), just as a broom or vacuum clears 
the dirt from a house. Speaking in modem scientific 
terms, the breathing process is intimately linked to 
the brain and central nervous system. It is also re¬ 
lated to the hypothalamus, which involves the emo¬ 
tions, body temperature, memory, and perceptions. 
Erratic thinking of the hypothalamus also leads to 
erratic breathing and eventually to asthma. So, a quiet 


breath keeps the body healthy and the mind at peace. 

Pranayama is related to the in and out breaths of 
the nose. Certain areas of the nose’s mucus mem¬ 
brane are connected to the visceral organs (i.e., tho¬ 
rax, abdomen, heart, lungs, kidneys, and intestines). 
According to yogic thinking, when this nasal breath¬ 
ing becomes irregular, the visceral organs connected 
to the coccygeal plexus also become irregular. In turn, 
they send sporadic messages to the brain, causing 
further irregularities. When the breath is held, it al¬ 
lows for a longer assimilation time of the prana. The 
result is the exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide 
in the cells. Thus, the breath is intimately linked to 
physical and mental health. 

Throughout yogic literature it is written that those 
who use fewer breaths will live longer. So, learning 
how to make the breath automatically stop, helps fos¬ 
ter longevity. Spiritually, this stoppage of breath (i.e., 
the stopping of one’s mind), allows one to delve more 
deeply into one’s inner Self of peace, alertness, and 
harmony. 










The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Five aspects of breath exist: 


5 Breaths of Pranayama 


Breath 

Function 

Direction 

Organs 

Pran 

Vayu 

absorption 

out 

head, heart, 
lungs 

Udcin 

Vayu 

communica¬ 
tion, will 

up 

throat & 
facial 
expression 

Saman 

Vayu 

assimilation 

omni-dir- 

ection 

small 

intestines 

Vyan 

Vayu 

circulation 

different 

directions 

pervading the 
whole body 

Apan 

Vayu 

elimination 

down 

urinary, 

excretory, 

reproductive 


According to some yogis, saman is the most 
important Vayu sub -dosha because it is related to the 
sushumna channel or nadl. Through yoga, pran and 
apan are united in the location of saman, and life- 
breath is suspended. 

The prana (life-breath, which is different from 
Prana Vayu) is made to flow through the ncidls 
(channels). Prana cleanses the nadls of impurities 
acquired from bad habits (e.g., junk food, fatigue, 
drugs, chemicals, radiation, pollution, etc.). Pran 
naturally develops during sadhana (meditation); and 
also cleanses karmic impurities (i.e., past life bad 
habits). The various Vedic scriptures say 72,000 to 
350,000 ncidls exist in the human body. 

The prana that flows through the nadls is stored 
in the energy centers (chakras) situated along the 
sushumna (tube) inside the spinal column. These 
centers, located in the subtle body, affect the physical 
body’s nerve plexus. Chakras influence both the 
physical and causal bodies. 

Six main chakras are generally recognized as 
having their own specific correlation to physical 
functioning (see table on next page). 


Sushumna 

(center tube in spine) 



Chakras 























Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 9: Hatha Yoga, Pranayama, Nada, Mudra, Bandha 



(middle) 
main channel 


Pingala 

(right) 

solar 

channel 


Ida 

(left) lunar 
channel 


CHAKRAS, ORGANS AND SENSES THEY CONTROL 


Chakra 

Location 

Organs 

Sense 

1. Muladhara 

perineum 

urinary/excretory/reproductive glands & 
hormones 

nose/smell 

2. Swadhishthana 

two fingers 
above perineum 

sacral plexus: urinary/reproductive glands & 
organs 

tongue/taste 

3. Manipura 

navel 

digestive/absorption 

eyes/sight 

4. Anahdta 

heart 

respiration, heart, lungs, thymus 

hands/touch 

5. Vishuddha 

throat 

purifies mind and body, thyroid 

ears/sound 

6. Ajfia 

third eye 

medulla oblongata, pineal gland 

intuition 
























The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


The first five chakras have nadls that extend to the 
various organs of sense and action. The sixth chakra 
relates to higher mental or spiritual activity. Beyond 
the sixth chakra one enters the realm of the “non- 
describable” and begins to merely “be” in the state of 
unbounded eternity or Brahman. This is the goal of 
life— Brahman or Self-Realization. It is for this reason 
that the Vedic sages do not put much emphasis even 
on the celestial experiences experienced through the 
sixth chakra. 

The next chapter discusses the effects of mantras 
on the chakras and their corresponding health 
concerns. The chart below shows how the chakras 
relate to the various aspects of human personality. 


Chakras 

Human Characteristics 

1. Muladhara 

animal instincts 

2. Svadhishthana 

selfish ego 

3. ManipUra 

sensuality, greed, 
ambition 

4. Anahdta 

emotions 

5. Vishuddha 

accepting life’s 
adversities, mental 
balance, sensitivity 

6. Ajhd 

gateway to Self- 
Realization 


So we see that prana cleanses the nadls, and in 
turn the cluikras. As they are cleansed, one’s spiritual 
life-force is allowed to flow higher, developing or 
utilizing the benefits of the higher chakras. As one is 
able to live with their higher chakras opened, life 
becomes more peaceful, graceful, and Divine. 

Yet, the nadls and cluikras must be cleansed gently 
and naturally; so that the sudden—and possibly 
harmful life-force—will not flow through the 
channels before they are ready. A clay pot must be 
baked in an oven to hold water properly; if it is not 
properly prepared, it will quickly disintegrate. Like 
the clay pot, the nadls and chakras must be prepared 
to accept the flow of the life-force or they too will 


disintegrate. Medically speaking, prdndydm strengthens 
the sympathetic, parasympathetic, and the central 
nervous systems to accept the charge of life energy. 

So, prana is valuable from both the medical and 
spiritual viewpoints. Two ways of inducing 
prdndydma exist: automatic or manual. The Rig Veda 
Bhasyabhumika, an ancient Vedic scripture, says that 
through proper sadhana (meditation), prdndydma 
occurs on its own, cleansing what is needed—when 
it is needed. The Vedic scriptures caution persons from 
trying to open their chakras on their own, for such an 
opening can cause great damage physically, 
psychologically, and spiritually. 


Pranayama/Kumbhaka 

Through pranaydm breathing exercises, one 
manually stimulates the prana flow. Not only can 
this be dangerous without proper instruction, but it 
can also be considered unnecessary if one practices 
proper sadhana. Then, should one care to do manual 
prdndydm, it is an option rather than a necessity. 

Below are listed some of the more useful 
breathing exercises one may manually practice for 
the healing of specific diseases. They are also 
discussed to inform those who have these experiences 
occurring automatically in meditation, but who 
neither realize such experiences are normal nor 
understand their value. 

Precautions: Do not hold the breath if suffering 
from high blood pressure. Inhaling, exhaling, and 
holding of breath should be gentle, slow, and 
comfortable at all times. Straining can cause harm. 

Note: 

1st Stage of practicing prdndydm: one may notice 
perspiration or warming sensation during the practice. 
This is due to increased sympathetic nervous system 
activity. 
















Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 9: Hatha Yoga, Pranayama, Nada, Mudra, Bandha 


Rub the body with this perspiration. It promotes 
steadiness and firmness (balancing and toning the 
nerves, muscles, and the entire system). 

2nd Stage there may be quivering, trembling, or 
sensations in the spine; also twitching of the hands, 
face, or other muscles. This is normal as stresses are 
released; the mind and body reorient themselves to 
function in a more coordinated and efficient manner. 

3rd Stage the mind becomes steady; the breath stops 
moving. 

It is recommended to have milk and ghee added 
to one’s diet when first beginning prdndydm practice. 
Persons should not eat at all for at least 1 hour before 
this practice. Foods should be based on one’s 
Ayurvedic constitution. 


when a person remains permanently centered inside 
themselves. Their vital breath is ever still— 
unaffected—even when involved in activity. 

So we see how spontaneously prdndydm is 
cultured through a natural process of sadhana or 
meditation. It may now be understood more clearly 
why the Vedic scriptures say that pranayama (that 
uses fingers to control the breath) are elementary 
methods of yoga. Still, when disease exists, prdndydm 
is recommended by the Ayurvedic practitioner for 
healing. 


1. Shitall Kumbhaka (Cooling Breath) 

Shltala means cool. Kumbhaka means breath. 


General Benefits: Besides those benefits discussed 
earlier, prdndydm also removes hiccups, cough, 
headache (and migraine), eye and ear pains, 
respiratory and digestive problems (i.e., asthma, 
wheezing, indigestion, hyperacidity), mucus, fat, 
obesity. It helps with all diseases caused by the three 
doshas. 

Discussed in the Vedic scripture, the Yogashikd 
Upanishad, is a four-stage process of Yoga or Self- 
Realization: Mantra, Hatha (and pranayama), Lay a, 
and Raja. All stages develop or refine the breathing 
process until it ceases to flow. This is the goal of 
breathing exercises. 

After one begins a natural form of mantra 
sadhana (meditation), hatha yoga begins 
automatically. Pranayama is related to hatha. Hatha 
means the unification of the upper and lower vital 
breaths of the body. By uniting the breath that flows 
through the thousands of channels, the breaths merge 
into the sushumnd, or spiritual tube (inside the spine). 

As previously discussed, the result of this 
unification is the stilling of the breath. The ceasing 
of inhalation and exhalation occurs spontaneously 
during the Laya stage of yoga. Here one is absorbed 
in their inner eternal, Divine Self. The senses do not 
perceive any outside objects or thoughts. This creates 
a great peace in the spirit that, healthwise, brings much 
mental and physical healing, alertness and calm. 

Eventually this stillness of breath becomes 
permanent. This is called the final stage, or Raja Yoga, 

^ As 


D) Slowly exhale through the nose. 

Options: one may make a humming sound during 
exhalation. This is 1 round. E) Repeat for 5 to 10 
minutes. 

Alternative Slowly inhale through nose to accomplish 
the same effect. 



Method: 


A) Sit in Siddhasana Siddha YoniAsana; ex tend and 
curl the tongue with its sides facing up. B) Slowly 
inhale through the middle of the tongue making a 
slight hissing sound. 

C) Options: After inhalation, the chin may rest o the 
collar bone (Jalandhara Bandha); hold the breath if 
comfortable. 











The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Alternative Curl tongue towards the back of the throat 
and slowly inhale. 

Precautions: Do not use shltall with high blood 
pressure. Also, quick inhalation brings oxygen into 
the system and will increase heat; slow inhalation 
only allows nitrogen to enter the system. 

Benefits: Shltall cools the entire system; soothes the 
eyes and ears, reduces fevers, bile, burning, heat 
sensations, indigestion, thirst, and removes phlegm. 

Organs Helped: Liver, spleen, and all Pitta organs. 

Doshas: PK- 


2. Nadi Shodhana Pranayama 



Method: 

A) Sit in Siddhasana or Siddha Yoni Asana. 

B) The right thumb closes the right nostril. The index 
and middle fingers rest on the third eye. The ring finger 
rests beside the left nostril. 

C) Slowly inhale through the left nostril, breathing 
into the belly (the belly rises) until lungs are 
comfortably filled. Focus on the cooling, healing ‘in 
breath’. 

D) Close the left nostril with the ring finger. Remove 
the thumb from the right nostril and slowly exhale 
through the right nostril. Focus on the release of stress 
and tension with the ‘out breath’. 

E) Inhale through the right nostril; then exhale through 
the left nostril. This is 1 round. Repeat from step B 
for 9 more rounds. 


Precaution: Those who do not have heart problems or 
high blood pressure, and who have practiced this 
method for some time, may begin to comfortably hold 
the breath before exhaling. Never strain to hold the 
breath—it may cause harm. 

Benefits: This practice cleanses the solar and lunar 
channels (pitigala and idci), helping keep excess 
Kapha out of the body. This practice makes the mind 
silent and alert. 

Doshas: VPK- 


3. Suryabheda Pranayama (Solar Breathing) 

Method: (see previous photo) 

A) Sit in Siddhasana/Siddha Yoni Asana. The right 
thumb is beside the right nostril. The index and middle 
finger rest on the third eye, and the ring finger is on 
the left nostril. 

B) Slowly inhale through the right nostril, breathing 
into an expanding belly, until the lungs are 
comfortably full. Focus on the cooling, healing ‘in¬ 
breath’ . 

C) Close the right nostril with the thumb. Open the 
left nostril and slowly exhale, focusing on the release 
of stress and tension. This is 1 round. 

D) Close the right nostril and open the left nostril, 
and begin again with step B. Practice initially for 10 
times. Later one can increase the time from 1 to 2 
minutes. 

Benefits: This improves energy, left brain, and 
sympathetic nervous system activity; it decreases 
parasympathetic functioning, and balances or 
promotes harmony between the two hemispheres of 
the brain. It balances Pitta and Kapha, removing 
dullness from the mind, reverses the aging process, 
and promotes longevity. Benefits result from the 
increased hormonal secretions of the 
















Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 9: Hatha Yoga, Pranayama, Nada, Mudra, Bandha 


pituitary gland and endocrine system (that cause 
aging). Some say this also removes excess Vayu. 

Doshas: VK-; this method increases the solar heat in 
the body. Breathing in the right nostril brings air 
through the pingald or solar channel. Surya means 
sun. Some say not used by Pittas. 


4. Chandrabheda Pranayama 
(Lunar Breathing) 



This is the reverse process of Suryabheda (i.e., 
breathing through the left or ida nostril and exhaling 
through the right or pingald nostril). Some say this is 
not recommended; however, when practiced by Pitta 
doshas, it can cool the system. Alternatively, a Pitta 
dosha may practice shitall to cool the system instead. 


Method: 

A) Sit in lotus or Siddhasana/Siddha Yoni Asana. The 
body is aligned with hands on the knees. 

B) Slowly and deeply inhale. 

C) Breathe out quickly and forcefully through the 
nose (but without straining). 

D) Immediately after the exhalation— just as 
forcefully—breathe in. 

E) This can be practiced continually and rhythmically 
for 10 times (one round). 

F) Rest and wait for breathing to return to normal; 
then practice again. Rest and repeat for three rounds). 
As one acclimates oneself to this practice, speed will 
increase as rhythm is maintained. 

Benefits: Awakens the life-force, removes excess 
mucus, pierces the psychic knots (granthis), stimu¬ 
lates the lungs, heart, and blood circulation; oxygen¬ 
ates the blood, and increases the sympathetic nerves 
in the respiratory center to release carbon dioxide. It 
improves oxygen absorption and visceral organs; the 
entire body is massaged, nasal and sinus passages 
are cleansed. It builds resistance to colds and respira¬ 
tory diseases (e.g., asthma, sinusitis, bronchitis), helps 
arthritis, TB, constipation, sciatica, rheumatism, can¬ 
cer, physical and mental tension. Bhastra improves 
clarity, sluggishness, increases appetite, vitality, and 
immune system functioning. It removes emotional 
insecurity, sexual tension, bile, obesity; and improves 
intuition. Kundalini is stirred. 

Doshas: All 


5. Bhastra Kumbhaka (Bellows Breath) 

This method gently forces the air in and out of the 
lungs with equal lung movement. The inhalation 
should be gentle enough so as not to cause the nos¬ 
trils to be sucked closed. Air should only flow through 
the nose; not the throat. The body, shoulders, and chest 
remain unmoved throughout the practice. The lungs, 
diaphragm, and abdomen will move. Upon exhala¬ 
tion, the belly is to be pulled in; during inhalation 
release the belly muscles so the belly expands again. 


6. Kapalbhati Kumbhaka 
(Frontal Brain Cleanse) 

Kapal means forehead, and bhati means light, 
splendor, or knowledge. Thus, this form of prdndydm 
invigorates the whole brain, awakening the dormant 
centers of subtle perception. Breathing should be like 
the pumping of a bellows. The exercise compresses 
the brain (slightly) and the fluid around it during in- 











The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


halation. The brain and cerebrospinal fluid are decom¬ 
pressed during exhalation. Thus, the brain is massaged. 

Method: 

A) Sit comfortably and erect in Siddhasan/Siddha 
Yoni Asana; close the eyes and relax. Place hands in 
the Jnyan or Chin Mudra. 

B) Inhale deeply, then do 50 fast (shorter) inhale/ex¬ 
hales, with more emphasis on the exhalation and 
shorter inhales. Chin lock may be employed. 

C) After the last exhalation, inhale deeply through 
the nose and exhale quickly through pursed lips. 

D) Release the chin lock, raise the head slowly, and 
inhale slowly through the nose (1 round). 

E) Practice 2 more rounds. 

F) End by closing eyes and concentrating on the space 
between the eyebrows. 

Precaution: Do not practice with bad lungs, eyes, ears, 
or high/low blood pressure. If dizziness or nosebleeds 
are experienced, breathing is too forceful. Stop and 
sit quietly until dizziness disappears, then try again 
less forcefully. If the nose bleeds, stop the practice 
for a few days. 

Benefits: This method expels carbon dioxide and 
other waste gases from the cells and lungs; sinuses 
are drained, eyes are cooled. It invigorates the liver, 
spleen, pancreas, and abdominal muscles (thereby 
improving digestion); it also gives a sense of total 
exhilaration. This kumbhaka reverses the aging pro¬ 
cess, relaxes facial muscles and nerves, rejuvenates 
tired cells and nerves, and keeps the face young, shin¬ 
ing and free from wrin kl es. 

Alternative Follow the same process, only breathe in 
one nostril, out the other, then in the latter and out the 
first. 

Doshas: All 


7. Bhramarl Kumbhaka 
(Humming Bee Breath) 

It is best practiced in the early morning or late at 
night, when it is quiet, and one is better able to hear 
inner sounds. It is practiced after asanas and active 
pranaydma, and before meditation or sleep (on an 
empty stomach). 

Method: 

A) Sit in Siddhasana/Siddha Yoni Asana and relax. 
Eye remain closed and the body i erect. Do the chin 
lock. 

B) Slowly and deeply inhale through the nose, lis¬ 
tening to the sound of the breath. 

C) Close the ears with the index or middle fingers by 
pressing the outer part of the ear ligament into the 
ear hole. 

D) Keeping the ears closed, exhale, making a soft, 
low pitched humming sound. Concentrate on the 
sound. 

E) After fully exhaling, bring hands to the knees and 
breath slowly and naturally. 

F) Practice this for 10 to 20 rounds. 

G) When finished, keep eyes closed and listen for 
any subtle sounds. 

Alternative: (See above photo) Close ears with 
thumbs, the eyes with the index fingers, the nostrils 
with the middle fingers, and the mouth with the ring 
and pinky fingers. 

Hold the breathe and this position for as long as is 
comfortable, then exhale while keeping fingers in 
place. Be aware of any subtle sound vibrations or 
images that may appear while in this position. 

Benefits: It awakens intuition and subtle or psychic 
sensitivity, relieves mental tension, anger, 


















Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 9: Hatha Yoga, Pranayama, Nada, Mudra, Bandha 


anxiety, and insomnia. 
Doshas: All 


8. Shltkarl Kumbhaka (Hissing Breath) 

The hissing sound, produced from inhaling 
through clenched teeth, makes a noise like the sound, 
‘seet’. Karl means produce. Thus, shltkarl produces 
the sound of ‘seet’. During hot weather, one can 
practice up to 10 minutes. 

Method: 

A) Sit comfortably in Siddhasana/Siddha YoniAsana. 
Eyes are closed and the body is erect. Hands are on 
the knees in the Jhyan Mudra. Do the chin lock. 

B) Bring the teeth together (upper and lower) and 
separate the lips. 

C) Slowly and deeply, inhale through the gaps in the 
teeth, listening to the sound it makes. 

D) After inhaling, close the mouth and exhale through 
the nose. 

E) Repeat 20 times. 

Precaution: Practice only in the warm months as this 
exercise cools the body. Do not practice with chronic 
constipation. Some say not to practice when suffering 
from high blood pressure. 

Benefits: One develops qualities of Divine love. It 
lowers blood pressure, cools the tongue, lungs, the 
entire body; and mind; it also harmonizes the 
endocrine system, and it regulates reproductive 
hormone secretion. It also creates charisma and 
develops purity. 

Doshas: PK- 


B) Slightly contract the back of the throat (as when 
swallowing). 

C) Inhale deeply and slowly through the nose. The 
contraction will cause a slight snoring sound, but do 
not use force. The sound will come from the throat, 
not the nose. Concentrate on the sound. Then exhale 
through the nostrils. 

D) Practice for 1 to 5 minutes. 

Alternative Curl the tip of the tongue to the back of 
the throat during the above practice. 

Precaution: Do not practice with low blood pressure. 
Those with high blood pressure should practice while 
in the corpse pose. 

Benefits: Dispels phlegm from the throat, increases 
digestion, cleanses nadls; heals dropsy, insomnia, 
mental tension; aerates the lungs, soothes and tones 
the nerves and the entire body. 

Doshas: All 


10. Murchha Kumbhaka (Swooning Breath) 

Murchha means to swoon or faint. This process 
develops the conscious experience of the unconscious. 

Method: 

A) Sit comfortably in Siddhasana/Siddha Yoni Asana, 
with chin lock. Palms are on the knees and eyes are 
closed. 

B) Slowly and deeply inhale through the nose. Hold 
the breath. 

C) Slightly release the chin lock and exhale slowly. 

D) Wait for the breath to return to normal (1 to 2 
minutes), then repeat. 

E) Concentrate on the void sensation. 


9. Ujjayl Kumbhaka (Conquering Breath) 

Ujjayl means “to conquer.” In this practice, the lungs 
swell up l ik e one proud of victory. 

Method: 

A) Sit comfortably in Siddhasana/Siddha YoniAsana, 
or lie in the corpse pose, and watch the breath. 



. fe' ^ 
























The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Precautions: Do not practice with high blood pressure, 
vertigo, or heart disease. 



Benefits : Heart rate and pressure are adjusted, mind 
is silenced; anxiety, tension, anger, and lethargy are 
reduced. 


Doshas: VK- 


11. Bahya Kumbhaka 
(Outer Breath Retention) 

Method: 

A) Sit comfortably in siddMsana/siddha yoni dsana, 
with eyes closed and palms on the knees. 

B) Slowly inhale through the nose; slowly and com¬ 
pletely exhale. 

C) The chin lock may now be used. Hold the breath 
without inhaling. 

D) Release the chin lock and slowly inhale. 

E) Rest and wait for the breath to return to normal (1 
to 2 minutes), then repeat. 

Precautions: Do not perform this exercise if suffer¬ 
ing from high blood pressure. 

Benefits: The life-breath is stabilized, absorption in 
samadhi (divine peace). Kundalini penetrates the 
chakras as it rises up the sushumna and reaches the 


12. Kayvala Kumbhaka 
(Automatic Still Breath) 

This breathing is superior to all other forms of 
kumbhaka. This frequently takes place, when through 
the guru \s grace, the kundalini enters the sushumna. 
This is the automatic stabilization of breath, of its 
own accord. It produces indescribable comfort. 

As with asanas, prdndydma/kumbhaka, 
mudras, and bandhas —overlaps exist. Nada is also 
briefly discussed at the end of part 3. Nada occurs 
naturally during proper, natural sadhana (meditation). 
Again, for those who may be naturally hearing these 
sounds, they should be secure in the knowledge that 
these are con fir mations of spiritual development; they 
are not signs of trouble. 

The practical benefits of developing nada are that 
one’s intuition and higher mental faculties are 
developed, along with more peace, concentration, 
clarity, and improved memory. It also improves 
hearing. 

This is the value of sound or music therapy. Much 
insight can be gained from the expression, ‘music 
soothes the savage beast’. In India, classical musicians 
know that certain scales, melodies, etc., produce 
certain moods and evoke various feelings. A whole 
science exists that prescribes certain forms of music 
for the various hours of the day, and for each season. 
Listening to the appropriate music at the right times 
balances the individual with time and nature. 

Mantra therapy is also a part of sound. Kundalini 
life-force is the essence of all mantras and all sounds. 
Traditionally, the guru enlivens the mantra, the life- 
force begins to awaken and rise up the sushumna, 
bringing peace and union to the individual. As the 
life-force rises it stills the mind. This is the value of 
mantra and all sound therapy. Through sadhana, Yoni 
Mudra, and Brahmari Kumbhaka, ncida are 
developed. 

Anahdta (unstruck sound) is the inner sound of 
‘chin-chin’ heard in the distance, along with various 
other sounds. They are frictionless, so they are called 
unstruck. The Vedic scripture, Hahsopanishad, says 
there are 10 different forms of Aanahdta Nada. These 
are the unstruck sounds of the eternal, Divine. 


crown. 












Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 9: Hatha Yoga, Pranayama, Nada, Mudra, Bandha 


Through tracing them back to their source (the eternal), 
one begins to see the unification of all aspects of life, 
self, and environment as one integrated whole or eternal 
reality. That is, all sounds are subtler or grosser 
vibrations of eternity. The Vedic text, 
Yogashikhopanishad, says there is nothing (i.e., no 
mantra or incantation) that is superior to nada, 
through which some obtain full Self-Realization. 

In the book Yoga Vani, four stages of nada are dis¬ 
cussed: 

1. Para: Nada evolves out of the kundalini life-force 
at the muldclhdra (first chakra), like a seed or a dot. 

2. Pashyanti: Only the most highly advanced spiritual 
adepts (yogis) can hear nada at this stage. When one 
neither hears sounds nor feels with their ears, but hears 
sounds intuitively. 

3. Madhyama: When nada rises to the heart, it sounds 
like the rumbling of thunder. It is felt by the ears, but 
not heard; this is called madhyama. 

4. Baikhari: When sound rises to the throat it produces 
voice or sound. Nada heard by the ears is called 
baikhari. 

All language comes from nada. Thus, all sounds 
and language are grosser expressions of the life-force. 
Nada, in turn is a subtle expression of the eternal, 
Divine. When one hears the unstruck sound, they are 
hearing the eternal itself. 

Here was discussed nada as it is developed 
through mantras guided by gurus. When a gum is 
not available one can use mantras for specific 
therapies; these are detailed in Chapter 10. 



into the chakras and sushumna; they stimulate higher 
mental functioning. Some mudras are done with the 
asanas and pranaydm, while others are done after 
these first two practices. As said earlier, merely by 
practicing sadhana (meditation) instmcted by a true 
guru, dsana, pranaydm, and mudra occur 
spontaneously. However, for those who are interested, 
the specific exercises may be practiced separately. 
Various mudras can be seen in performances by 
traditional Indian dancers. 

Note that practicing these exercises can create 
problems if not taught or performed properly. Those 
who awaken their kundalini without a guru can lose 
their direction in life. Without the knowledge of 
harmonizing or using these energies, they can become 
confused or mentally imbalanced. If the kundalini 
rises through the ida or pihgald, instead of the 
sushumna, or if chakras are opened in an isolated 
manner, more harm than good can arise. Thus, yoga 
(hatha, kundalini, and tantra) need to be taught in a 
holistic or integrated manner. 

Some mudras and bandhas have briefly been 
discussed in part 1. Here, these same positions will 
be discussed without asanas. Twenty-five major 
mudras (and bandhas) are discussed in Gheranda 
Samhitd, and 10 in Hatha Yoga Pradlpika. These 
create longevity and reverse the aging process. Nine 
methods are outlined below. 


Preparatory Bandhas 

One first needs to learn three locks that are 
included in the mudra positions. These have been 
discussed as automatic occurrences in various asanas 
in section 1 of this chapter. Bandhas, or locks, cause 
the fife-force to unite and rise towards the sushumna 
or inner spiritual tube of the spine. Some bandhas 
cause the life-force to rise through the sushumna. 
Uddlyana Bandha is one such lock. By locking, or 
binding, the opposite poles of energy or shakti are 
united. 


Part 3 

Mudras & Bandhas '■ Uddlyana Bandha (Abdominal 

Mudras are specific body and hand positions that heti action Lock) 

. Ucldlyana means to nse up. Thus, the contrac- 

channcl the energy created by asanas and pranayam . • , , , . r , 

trons of the abdommal organs, whrch pull up, 








The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


create a natural upward flow of energy. This is known 
as a stomach lift. Here, the Apart (downward moving 
air) is united with the Prdn (outward moving air) and 
the Saman (equal moving air) at the navel center. It 
requires practice to accomplish this event, along with 
performing other asanas, prdndydm, mudras, 
bandhas, and sadhana. 

Uddlyana bandha involves the sucking in of the 
abdomen and stomach, and pulling it up (i.e., the belly 
is pulled towards the spine and upward). It may be 
done sitting, standing, or lying flat on the back. 

It may be practiced with asanas, prdndydma, or 
afterwards. Practicing is easier after an inverted dsana 
(e.g., after a shoulder stand). Always practice the chin 
lock with this posture. 

Precaution: Practice on an empty stomach. 

Stool and urine should be evacuated first. 

First learn the posture in the standing position. 

Do not practice with stomach or intestinal ulcers, 
hernia, high blood pressure, heart disease, glaucoma, 
or raised intracranial pressure. 

This position should be taught by a qualified 
teacher. This is an advanced practice; beginners may 
harm their bodies or minds. Simultaneously practicing 
the Vajroll mudra (contraction of reproductive organs 
and lower urinary system) is even better. 



relaxing the stomach and abdomen. 

H) Release the chin lock, rest, and wait for breath to 
return to normal (1 to 2 minutes). This is 1 round. 

I) Repeat another 2 rounds. 


Of all the bandhas, Uddlyana is the best Hatha 
Yoga Pradlpika Ch 3; v 60 

Method: Uddlyana Bandha 

A) Stand with the feet separated, about two feet apart. 

B) Bend the knees slightly, resting the palms on the 
knees. The thumbs face each other; fingers face 
outward. 

C) Spine is straight, head is upright, eyes look forward. 

D) Inhale deeply through the nose, then quickly exhale 
through slightly pursed lips (but do not force) until 
all air is expelled.. 

E) Engage the chin lock (to the chest) and raise 
shoulders. 

F) Pull in the abdomen and stomach towards the spine, 
and then pull upward. 

G) Hold for a few seconds (without discomfort). 
Concentrate on the throat or navel center. Inhale, 


Alternate (Sitting) 

The instructions are the same, except one may sit in 
Bhadrasana, Padmasana, or Siddhasana/Siddhi Yoni 
Asana. (If seated in siddhasana/siddhi yoni dsana, 
sit on a cushion to raise the buttocks.) 

Benefits: This slows and reverses the aging process; 
it also develops vitality, tones heart region, muscles, 
nerves, and glands. It increases blood circulation and 
absorption of nutrients. The heart is gently massaged. 
Strength is developed in the autonomic nerves in the 
solar plexus, alimentary canal, diaphragm, and 
respiratory system. It removes gas and carbon dioxide; 
and increases oxygen absorption in the brain; raises 
the life-force into the sushumnd. 

Organs Helped: All 
Doshas: All 











Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 9: Hatha Yoga, Pranayama, Nada, Mudra, Bandha 


2. Jalandhara Bandha (Throat Lock) 

‘Jal’ means throat, ‘jalam’ means water, and 
‘Dhdra means supporting tube. Thus Jalandhara 
Bandha is that which helps prevent the bindu (nectar) 
fluid from flowing down the throat and being 
consumed by the navel/sun. It is a very easy bandha 
to practice, but also very important. (Also discussed 
in part 1 on page 260). 

This pose can be done sitting or standing, and can 
be used with Uddlyana Bandha. It is also done with 
pranayama and other kriyds involving breath 
retention. 

Precaution: Do not practice with high blood pressure 
or heart disease. Do not practice without learning from 
a qualified teacher; the nerves in the path flowing to 
the brain may be impaired if performed improperly. 

Method: 

A) Sitting in Siddhasana/Siddha Yoni Asana, 
Padmasan, Shukhdsan, or Vajrdsana, place the palms 
on the knees and relax the whole body. 

B) Inhale slowly and deeply through the nose and 
hold the breath. 

C) Lower the chin as close to the collar bone as is 
comfortable; straighten the elbows and raise the 
shoulders. Hold the breath for as long as comfortable. 

D) Slowly raise the chin and relax the shoulders. 

E) Slowly exhale and rest until the breathing returns 
to normal (1 to 2 minutes). This is round 

F) Repeat for another 5 rounds. 

G) Then do 5 rounds while holding the breath out¬ 
side the body (i.e., holding the breath after exhaling 
all the air from the body). 

Phvsical/Mental Benefits: Alleviates throat disorders 
(i.e., inflammation, stuttering, excess mucus in the 
throat, tonsillitis, etc.). It improves voice quality and 
the life-force in the thoracic region. Higher brain func¬ 
tioning is stimulated. The metabolism is balanced 
from the flow of pituitary hormonal secretions to the 
endocrine glands. This improves one’s response to 
stress and develops instinctual abilities. Youthful vigor 
is maintained and restored. The throat mediates be¬ 
tween the brain and digestive/assimilation processes. 
This gland secretes the hormone thyroxine (T4) that 
is responsible for the tissue metabolism rate, or tis¬ 


sue aging. The parathyroid glands properly regulate 
calcium metabolism and body density. Diseases of 
old age are reduced due to the enzymatic and oxida¬ 
tion of the cells. Mental clarity is improved. 

Spiritual Benefits: Kundalinl ceases to flow in the 
idci and pihgald, and between the head and body. Thus 
the life-force is directed to flow through the sushumnd. 

Organs Helped: Pituitary, thyroid, parathyroid, brain, 
endocrine glands. 

Doshas: All 


3. Mula Bandha 

(Perineum/Cervix Retraction Lock) 

When the muscles of the perineum are contracted, 
the whole pelvic region is pulled up. Contraction does 
not include the anus (Ashwinl Mudra). During initial 
practice, a tendency exists to contract this anal region 
as well, but it is not to be practiced here. Mula Bandha 
occurs in the center of the body—not the front or 
back. In this way, the first chakra is directly 
stimulated, producing heat in the subtle body and 
awakening potential kundalinl (also see part 1). 

This bandha is first to be perfected by itself, but 
then it may be used with prdndydm, breath retention 
(kumbhaka) chin lock (Jalandhara), and abdominal 
(Udcllyana) bandhas. [See page 260, 291-293] 

Method: Step 1—Preparatory 

A) Sit in any comfortable pose (preferably 
Siddhasana/Siddha Yoni Asana because it 
automatically contracts the muldclhdra (1st) chakra. 

B) Keep palms on the knees in jhydn or chin mudra; 
and eyes closed. 













The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


C) Keep the spine erect and the body relaxed. 

D) Males need to contract just inside the perineum; 
so they need to concentrate on this area for a few 
minutes. Females should concentrate on the cervix 
because the cervix and vaginal muscles need to be 
contracted. 

E) After concentration, gradually begin to contract 
and release the muscles of the perineum/cervix. 
(Contract for a few seconds and breathe normally.) 
Contract up to 20 times. 

Method: Step 2 

F) Follow step 1. 

G) Contract the perineal/cervix muscles and hold for 
as long as possible, breathing naturally. Practice up 
to 20 times. 

Method: Step 3 

H) Contract gently and partially, and hold the 
contraction. 

I) Contract a little more and hold. Continue, gradually 
increasing the tension 10 times until full contraction 
is achieved. 

J) Hold the full contraction for as long as possible, 
attempting normal breathing. 


Alternative: Mula and jalandhara bandha; and 
internal and external breath retention. 

A) Sit straight; inhale deeply through the nose. 

B) Practice the above step 3. 

C) Before exhaling, release mula, then Jalandhara 
bandhas. When the head is straight, exhale. 

D) Practice 5 rounds of internal breath retention with 
step 2; then 5 rounds of external breath retention with 
step 3. 

E) Practice 5 rounds with Uddiybna Bandha, using 
step 2; then 5 rounds of step 3. 

It takes many months to become comfortable with 
Mula Bandha, and many years to perfect it. Do not 
be discouraged if you cannot perfect it immediately. 
Fike all processes of yoga and Self-Realization, it is 
a life process. 

Physical Benefits: Pituitary hormone balance 
(testosterone and estrogen/progesterone) regulates the 


system and slows and reduces the aging process. 
Improved nutrient absorption, digestion, nervous 
system, blood circulation, mental functions (e.g., 
memory, concentration, alertness, less sleep, etc.). 

Spiritual Benefits: Prdn/Apdn and bindu/nada are 
united. Fran and Apdn were discussed earlier. Bindu 
is the semen/ovum that has two parts: at the first and 
last chakra, these are united. Unification awakens the 
first chakra, and begins the spiritual awakening of 
the student. This transformation of bindu becomes 
nada, or eternal, blissful seed-sound, that emanates 
within the brain. 

By contracting the perineum, performing 
Udcliybna and locking idb and pihgald through 
Jalandhara, the sushumnd becomes active. 
Through this...old age and sickness are reversed. 

Hatha Yoga Pradipika Ch 3 v74-75 

cCiffr 





4. Maha Mudra (Great Position) 

This is to be performed after asanas and 
prdndydma, and before sdclhand (meditation). This 
mudra is similar to the Kriya Yoga practice. 


Method: [photo & alternate method—page 264] 

A) Press the left heel into the perineum (males) or 
cervix (female). The right leg is extended forward, 
and the back is straight. 

B) The hands extend outward and reach the knee, 
calf, or big toe (keeping the back straight). Keep the 
eyes closed and relax. 

C) Curl the tongue back towards the throat; slowly 
inhale, tilting the head slightly backwards (Khechari 
Mudra). Focus the eyes at the third eye (middle of 
the eyebrows —Shdmbhavl Mudra). 

D) Hold the breath for as long as is comfortable and 
contract the perineum or cervix (mula bandha). 















Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 9: Hatha Yoga, Pranayama, Nada, Mudra, Bandha 


E) With breath held, rotate the awareness from the 
third eye—to the throat—to the base of the spine. 
Mentally repeat the corresponding words, Ajnya (third 
eye), Vishuddha (throat). Muladhara (spine base) [or; 
Shdmbhavl, Khechari, Mula]. Repeat for as long as 
possible, comfortably holding the breath. Do not strain 
breathing! 

F) Close eyes, release the perineum/cervix lock, bring 
the head upright, and exhale slowly. 

Practice three times with the left leg folded, then 
3 times with the right leg folded. Then keep both legs 
stretched in front and perform this method 3 more 
times. 

Precaution: To prevent harm hold the breath only so 
long as it is comfortable. This mudrci should be taught 
and observed by a competent teacher. 

Method 2: This method may be practiced in 
Siddhasana or Siddha Yoni Asana if it is more 
comfortable. Keep hands on the knees in jhycin or 
chin mudra (finger position methods discussed on 
page 261). Sit upright. 

Benefits: This method purifies all the bodily channels, 
balances the ida and pihgald, purifies rasa dhatu and 
rasavaha srota (plasma tissue and channels)—the 
basis of the entire body. It stimulates the flow of the 
sushumna, increases vitality, digestion, absorption of 
nutrients, abdominal disorders, constipation, s ki n 
diseases, and harmonizes all bodily functions. Mahd 
Mudra improves clarity of thinking, removes 
depression, and stills the mind, preparing it for 
sadhana. It creates a dynamic pranic and psychic 
vitality. 

Doshas: All 


5. Maha Bandha (Great Lock) 

This bandha is done between bellow-breath 
prdndyamas. Each posture helps the breath retention 
of the other (see photo on page 264). 

Method: Inner breath retention (Antar Kumbhaka) 


A) Press the left heel against the perineum (or female 
reproductive organ); place the right foot in half lotus 
(on the left thigh). 

B) Inhale through the left nostril and hold the breath. 
Perform the chin lock (jalandhara bandha). Squeeze 
the perineum or cervix (mula bandha), and eyes 
gazing at third eye (Shambhavl mudra). Eyes may 
remain closed. 

C) Hold the breath for so long as it is comfortable. 
Then, release the bandluis and mudra, slowly exhaling 
through the right nostril. 

D) Repeat B and C; only inhale through the right 
nostril and exhale through the left nostril. 

E) Rest for 1 or 2 minutes, concentrating on the natural 
inhalation and exhalation of the breath. This 
completes 1 round. 

F) Repeat for 2 more rounds. 

Precautions: Do not practice if suffering from high 
or low blood pressure, hernia, stomach, or intestinal 
ulcer or heart ailments. Good health is necessary for 
this pose. 


Alternative External breath retention 

A) Sit in siddhasana or siddha yoni asana, with hands 
on the knees (in chin or jnyan mudra). The spine is 
erect, the head is straight, the eyes are closed. Relax. 

B) Slowly inhale through both nostrils. Then exhale 
forcefully and completely through pursed lips 
(drawing in the gut helps the expulsion of air). Retain 
the breath outside. 

C) Do the bandhas and mula as in the above method, 
keeping the breath outside for so long as it is 
comfortable. 

D) Rotate the awareness from the spine base 
(muladhara) to the navel (manipura) to the throat 
(vishuddha); mentally repeat the names of these 
chakras while concentrating on each of them. 

E) When holding the breath is no longer comfortable, 
release the bandhas and mula and slowly exhale. 














The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


F) Keep eyes closed and relax for 1 to 2 minutes. This 
is 1 round. 

G) Repeat for 2 more rounds. 

Precautions: Do not practice with high or low blood 
pressure, hernia, stomach or intestinal ulcer, or heart 
ailments. Good health is necessary for this pose. 

Physical/Mental Benefits: Hormonal secretion is pro¬ 
duced and regulated, halting the degeneration of the 
aging process. 

Spiritual Benefits: One develops the spontaneous and 
natural ability of stopping the breath. It unites the 
nadls in the Ajna chakra, enabling higher meditation 
abilities. One experiences the silent witness. The in¬ 
dividual merges with the universal. 

Organs Helped: Pineal gland, endocrine system. 


6. Maha Bheda Mudra 
(Great Piercing Position) 

The previous two exercises, Maha Mudra and 
Maha Bandha begin to awaken the kundalini shakti 
(life-energy). This present mudra releases and directs 
the shakti. But doing the first two exercises without 
Maha Bheda Mudra is l ik e purchasing a car without 
gasoline: you are prepared to travel but have no means 
to move. This position directs the kundalini into the 
sushumnd (inner central tube of the spine)—up to 
the ajna chakra —by gently bouncing the buttocks 
on the floor. 

This is not the same as the Kriya Yoga practice , 
Maha Bheda Mudra, but it is similar. The Kriya prac¬ 
tice known as Tadan Kriya is the same as this pres¬ 
ently described position. 

Method: (Only for those who can sit in full lotus) 

A) Sit in full lotus, relax the body, keep the eyes 
closed. Place palms on the floor beside the thighs. 

B) Slowly and deeply inhale through the nose. Hold 
the breath and do the chin lock (to the chest). 

C) Raise the body off the floor by transferring the 
weight to the hands and gently bounce the buttocks 
against the floor from 3 to 7 times. Maintain 


awareness at the base of the spine ( muladhara chakra). 
[Buttocks and thighs should be touching the floor 
during the gentle bouncing, and the spine should be 
kept erect.] 

D) Exhale slowly and deeply; then rest. Concentrate 
on the base of the spine, and wait for the breathing to 
return to normal (1 to 2 minutes). This is round 1. 

E) Repeat for another 2 rounds. 

[In the Tadan Kriya, the breath is slowly inhaled 
through the mouth. The eyes are focused at the third 
eye (the chin lock is not done). Also, one bounces the 
buttocks gently on the floor. Then, one visualizes in¬ 
haling through a long thin pipe and exhales, visualiz¬ 
ing the breath diffusing in all directions from the base 
of the spine. This is a more complex practice.] 

Benefits: Restores youthfulness (slows the aging 
process), removes wrin kl es, gray hair, and trembling 
of old age. Hormonal secretions are produced and 
balanced. 

Organs Helped: Pineal and pituitary glands. 
Doshas: All 


6. Yoni Mudra 













Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 9: Hatha Yoga, Pranayama, Nada, Mudra, Bandha 


Close the ears, eyes, nose and mouth. A clear 
distinct sound is heard in the purified sushumnd. 

Hatha Yoga Pradlpika Ch. 4v 68 

H) When holding the breath is no longer comfort¬ 
able, release the yoni mudra', then slowly exhale. 
This is 1 round. Practice 5 to 10 rounds. 

This technique is discussed under the topic of men¬ 
tal peace, or samadhi, in Hatha Yoga Pradlpika. In 
Gherand Sarnhitd it is mentioned in the mudra sec¬ 
tion. 

We spoke earlier of the development from man¬ 
tra yoga to spontaneous hatha (and pranayama), lay a, 
and then to raja. After raja yoga, one attains Self- 
Realization or complete mental peace. This pose is 
related more to laya yoga than hatha yoga, and di¬ 
rectly awakens raja yoga. The awakening occurs 
through developing an awareness of inner sound 
(nada). 

Just as with all spiritual experiences that are out 
of the norm of supposed societal acceptance, the hear¬ 
ing of inner sounds or voices (nada) has generally 
been associated with mental illness. Spiritual coun¬ 
seling reassures a person that their experiences and 
feelings are spiritual—not abnormal. Understanding 
nada helps persons feel comfortable when hearing 
any inner sounds. As previously mentioned, all spiri¬ 
tual experiences are merely signs that progress is 
being made. One doesn’t want to attempt to develop 
any particular experiences because, no matter how 
divine or blissful, they remain in the temporal field 
of relativity. One who goes beyond the limits of ex¬ 
perience attains the limitless, eternal state of Self- 
Realization. 

Method: 

A) Sit in Siddhasana or Siddha Yoni Asana. Inial 
slowly and deeply, and hold the breath. 

B) Plug the ears with the thumbs. 

C) Plug the eyes with the index fingers. 

D) Close the nostrils with the middle fingers. 

E) Cover the upper lip with the ring fingers. 

F) Cover the lower lip with the pinkies. 

G) Concentrate on any perceivable subtle sounds. If 
a sound is heard, listen to it. If many sounds exist, 
listen to those in the right ear. The first sound heard is 
to be followed. Then, the next sound heard is also to 



be followed. 

Precautions: Be gentle with the fingers. Do not pen¬ 
etrate the ear too deeply or pres s too hard on the eyes. 

Benefits: The mind is instantly silenced, mental bliss 
occurs, and spiritual ‘unstruck’ sound is heard. The 
Self-luminous soul is perceived; thus one becomes 
stainless from this sight. 

Doshas: All 


8. Nabho Mudra 

Method: Extend the head forward slightly, mouth 
open, and inhale into the esophagus. 

Benefits: Reverses the aging process and destroys all 
diseases. 


9. Bhujangini Mudra 

Method: The tongue is curled up inside the mouth 
and the breath is held. Do this all the time (whenever 
you think of it [Gherand Sarnhitd]). Benefits: Re¬ 
moves stomach diseases and improves digestion. 


10. Kaki Mudra/Shitah 

Method: Lips are pursed like a crow’s beak; air is 
drawn in. 

Benefits: Long life, purifies all Pitta concerns (e.g., 
fever, blood, spleen), tumors. 

















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Final Note 

Hatha Yoga Asanas, Bandhas and Mudras 

Rounds: All positions that require 3 rounds may 
After the fourth month, practice only sitting 
slowly—over time, be increased to 10 rounds. 


Part 4 

Yoga for Pregnancy 

Practicing asanas while 
pregnant can be a safe and 
very effective method to stay 
fit, and can ease pregnancy. 

Back, shoulder, and neck 
pain occur from carrying 
extra weight; abdominal 
muscles become stretched 
and unused, and leg muscles 
stiffen and swell. Asanas 
help tone the body and keep 
it in shape and make the car¬ 
rying time, labor, and recov¬ 
ery easier. 

Although many asanas 
are not recommended for the pregnant woman, vari¬ 
ous simple positions can help counteract the adverse 
physical effects of carrying a baby. Gentle yoga is 
often as important as strenuous yoga. The cervix 
should remain tight, and those with histories of mis¬ 
carriages or cervical insufficiencies should take ex¬ 
tra care when practicing asanas. For nausea, fatigue, 
or dizziness, Ayurvedic herbs are available to bal¬ 
ance these conditions (see Section 3, Chapter 23). 
Practice can last from 10 to 20 minutes daily, with 
rest after each posture. 

This section is laid out in two parts, asanas that 
can be done throughout the pregnancy; and asanas 
that can be done after delivery. The poses are arranged 
in an easily followed order. 

Precautions: Do not perform any postures that chair 
and kneel on require lying on the stomach, that overly 
stretch pillow. Lift the right the abdominal muscles, 
or that only twist from the rib cage up. Always bend 

je 



from the hips (not the back). Keep the pelvis upright 
and the spine straight. 

After the fourth month, practice only sitting and 
lying-on-the-side postures. As with all practices, al¬ 
ways listen to your body. Do not hold any postures 
that cannot be practiced comfortably. 

[Note: See Chapter 23 for conception, delivery and 
post-partum herbs, abhyanga, mantras; for more 
deails on Ayurvedic childbirth.] 


1. Correct Posture 

Method: 

A) Stand erect, feet 
slightly apart—parallel 
with each other and di 
rectly under the shoulders. 

B) Tighten the front thigh 
muscles to straighten the 
legs fully relaxed 

C) Set the shoulders back 
and the chest out (shoul¬ 
ders should relax and 
hang). Arms and hands are 
relaxed. 

D) Extend the neck and 
look straight ahead. 

E) Lower the tailbone to 
the floor and push the hip 
bones forward and up. 


Benefits: Relieves lower back strain, aligns the ver¬ 
tebrae, improves breathing. 


2. Thigh Stretch 

Method: 

A) Place the chair (with its back) against the wall. 
Face the chair and kneel on a pillow. Lift the right 
knee, placing the right foot on the floor with the shin 
and thigh forming a right angle; toes under the chair. 
The back is straight. 

B) Touch the right knee to the front of the chair. Place 
fingers on the top front of the chair. 

C) Press the hands down and lift the chest to lengthen 
the spine; simultaneously push the tailbone down and 














Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 9: Hatha Yoga, Pranayama, Nada, Mudra, Bandha 



lift the front hip 
bones up. The 
left knee is 
slightly back. 
Feel a gentle 
stretch in the 
center of the 
thigh muscles. 
D) Repeat with 
the legs in the re¬ 
verse position. 
Then rest by sit¬ 
ting comfortably 
on the floor in 
Siddha Yoni Asana (just cross the legs; do not lift the 
right leg up). 

Benefits: Pelvic tilting stretches the spine, and the 
groin and thigh muscles. 


3. Chest & Shoulder Stretch 



Benefits: This pose stretches the chest and shoulder 
muscles, and relieves a rounded back and shoulders. 



4. Wall Squatting Pose 

Method: 

A) Stand with the 
back against the 
wall. Separate the 
feet, bend the 
knees, and squat 
(while resting the 
back against the 
wall). Alternate — 
lean on a sturdy 
chair to achieve 
the squat. 

B) Spread the 
knees, turn the 
toes outward, and 
place the elbows 
inside the knees; press palms together. 

C) Slowly inhale, pressing the knees apart with the 
elbows. 

D) Exhale, pressing your back against the wall to 
stretch the spine, and moving the tailbone down. 
Relax the lower back muscles. Hold this position for 
1 to 3 minutes. 

E) Relax and sit on the floor. Lean the back against 
the wall and keep the feet straight out. 


Method: 

A) With the chair in the same position, sit on a mat or 
folded towel. One’s back faces the front of the chair. 
Legs are extended straight forward and slightly apart. 

B) Place the arms behind the back, resting them on 
the seat; interlace the fingers. (If this is difficult, put 
more blankets or pillows under the buttocks to raise 
the body higher, and/or hold the sides of the seat). 

C) Tighten the thighs; slowly inhale and press the 
back of the legs and buttocks to the floor. 

D) Slowly exhale, lifting the chest and rolling the 
shoulders back; breathe normally. 

E) Remove arms from the seat, release hands, and sit 
comfortably. 


Benefits: Removes lower back pain; stretches the 
lower back, calf, and inner thigh muscles. 

5. Bound 
Angle Pose 

Method: 

A) Sit on a 
small pillow 
or folded 
blanket. 

Keep the 
back against 
the wall o 
away from 
the wall. 












The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Bend the knees to the side and bring the soles of the 7. Wide Leg Spine Twist 
feet together in front, holding the an kl es. 

B) Bring heels as close to the body as possible, then 
place palms on the floor. 

C) Slowly inhale, gently lifting the spine. 

E) Exhale and relax. 

F) Place the palms on the inner thighs. Slowly inhale, 
then slowly exhale and gently press thighs to the floor. 

G) If comfortable, gently lean forward from the hips 
and extend hands forward to the floor to straighten 
the spine and stretch the shoulders. 

H) Relax, sit up, and extend both legs forward. 





Benefits: This pose creates flexible hips and stretches 
the inner thigh muscles. 


Method: 


6. Wall—Single Leg Stretch 


Method: 


A) Sit on a 

rug or mat, V^l 

with the back 

against the jtijre .-y. 

wall; extend ^ 

the feet for- 

ward. a '' 

B) Bend the ^ 1 ‘ ^ 

right knee, 

placing the 

sole against L 
the inner left 

knee. 

C) With palms on the ground, push the tailbone so 
that it touches the wall, then straighten the left leg. 
Place a towel or belt around the ball of the left foot, 
and hold the strap ends with both hands. 

D) Slowly inhale, lift the chest, and press the entire 
back against the wall. 

E) Slowly exhale, gently pulling the strap to tighten 
the front thigh muscle and flex the foot. The spine 
should remain against the wall while the back of the 
left leg is being stretched. 

F) Repeat with the other leg. 


Benefits: Stretches the hamstring and calf muscles. 


A) Sit on a rug or mat with legs spread and heels 
extended. Tighten the front thigh muscles; press the 
backs of the knees to the floor. Place the palms on 
the floor beside the hips. 

B) Slowly inhale, pressing down to lift and lengthen 
the spine. 

C) Gently twist or rotate to the right, placing the left 
hand in line with the navel and the right hand behind 
the right hip. 

D) Slowly exhale. Gently lift the chest and twist to 
the right. 

E) Bring both hands beside the hips, turn to face for¬ 
ward again and rest. 

F) Bring the right hand in line with the navel. (The 
hand is on the floor.) 

G) Exhale and gently twist to the left. 

H) Repeat step F, gently bring legs together and rest. 


Benefits: This pose 
stretches the spine and 
inner thigh muscles. 


8. Hero’s Pose 


Method: 


A) Kneel on a mat or 
blanket. Separate the 
feet and place hands 
on the floor for sup¬ 
port. Gently lower the 
buttocks between the 
heels and sit on a 
folded blanket or small 




MjdxrlxraicjtzAl 











Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 9: Hatha Yoga, Pranayama, Nada, Mudra, Bandha 


pillow. (Adjust the height for comfort; place a blanket 
on the an kl es for comfort). The stretch should be in 
the thighs—not the knees. 

B) Squeeze the knees together, pressing on the floor 
with the fingertips; and stretch the spin upward. 

C) Place the palms on the knees, lifting and expanding 
the chest with each inhalation. 

D) Interlace fingers and lift the chest. Slowly inhale, 
then slowly exhale—stretching the arms over the 
head, with palms facing the ceiling. Extend the arms 
up from the shoulder blades. Keep the spine straight 
and lift from the lower back. 

E) Lower arms to the sides and widen the knees. Sit 
on the heels, bend forward from the hips and rest the 
head on the floor or pillow (do not press the belly on 
the floor). Arms are alongside the body. 

E) Release and extend the legs; sit with the legs 
extended and rest. 

Benefits: This pose may prevent varicose veins. 
Stretches the front of the thighs and the insteps. 
Relieves leg fatigue and indigestion. 


9. Corpse Pose 



Method: Lie on back, arms at the side, palms up. 
Breathe normally and feel the mind and body relax. 


Benefits: Body adjusts to its new tone, strength, and 
less stressful position. 

Important: Always end all dsana routines with the 
corpse pose (Shavdsan). 



Part 5 

Postpartum Asanas 



safe to do. Those listed below are useful for strength¬ 
ening abdominal muscles to help reduce stretches 
caused during pregnancy. Twisting poses re-shrink 
the uterus; relaxation poses help in recovering from 
fatigue. If there is no time to practice yoga with new¬ 
born babies around, postures may include them as 
part of the practice. 

Immediately after birth it is prudent to avoid 
strenuous exercises to flatten the abdomen. With pa¬ 
tience, the asanas, along with other Ayurvedic herbs 
and abhyanga oils, help restore the belly to its origi¬ 
nal tone. Perform postures carefully and gently, as 
with all yogic practices. Do not practice yoga if a 
hernia or rupture occurs after birth (i.e., a small bulge 
in the abdomen). 

To protect the spine, all abdominal tightening ex¬ 
ercises should be done while lying on the back. For 
cesarean births, wait 6 to 8 weeks before beginning 
asanas. Do not do shoulder stands until after post¬ 
partum discharge is completed. 


1. Seated Wall-Leg Stretch Adaptation 



Method: 


A) Sit and press the entire upper and lower back 
against the wall. 

B) With blankets on the thighs, bend forward from 
the hips. 

C) Slowly inhale, then slowly exhale, resting the fore¬ 
head and chest on the blankets (use more blankets to 
achieve a more comfortable height). 
















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Benefits: Stretches calves and hamstrings, relieves 
back tension, massages the uterus and shoulder to 
the floor, turning the head to the left returns it to its 
normal size. 


2. Seated Twist 



Method: 

A) Sit on the front half 
of a seat or step, feet and 
knees together. 

B) Place the back of the 
upper left elbow on the 
outer right thigh, and the 
right hand on the right 
side of the chair back, up 
per step, or wall. 

C) Slowly inhale, 
squeezing knees to¬ 
gether, lifting the chest 

D) Slowly exhale, press¬ 
ing the left elbow into the 
right outer thigh and twist the torso to the right. 

E) Reverse the hands and repeat in the opposite di¬ 
rection. 


Benefits: This pose (and the forward bends) massages 
the uterus to return to its normal size; it also strength¬ 
ens the oblique abdominal muscles. 


3. Reclining Twist 



Method: 

A) Lie on the back on a thick rug or mat, legs ex¬ 
tended. 

B) Bend the left knee and rest the left foot on the 
floor (crossed over the right leg). Place the right palm 
on the left outer knee. 


C) Slowly inhale; expand the chest. 

D) Slowly exhale; twist the hips, spine, and shoul¬ 
ders to the right; press the knee to the floor. 

E) Place the left arm on the mg and roll the left shoul¬ 
der to the floor, turning the head to the left. 
Breathe normally. 

F) Reverse the position and repeat in the opposite 
direction. 


Benefits: This pose stretches the outer hip, back, and 
shoulder muscles. It counteracts soreness from 
nursing and carrying the baby. 


4. Wall Relaxation Pose 

Method: 

A) Place a few 
folded blan¬ 
kets on the 
floor against 
the wall. Sit 
sideways on 
the blankets 
with the right 
hip against the 
wall. 

B) Bring the 
legs up against 
the wall as the 
back is lowered 
to a rug or mat. Slide the buttocks against or close to 
the wall, hips and lower back on the blankets. 

C) Breathe normally and feel the entire body relax¬ 
ing. The baby may rest on the abdomen or can be 
held in the air over the chest. 

D) Contract and relax the sphincter muscles around 
the generative organ. 

Benefits: This pose relaxes the legs, relieves back fa¬ 
tigue, and shoulder tension caused by nursing. The 
contraction increases circulation, healing; restores lost 
sensation, tightens organ muscles, strengthens the pel¬ 
vic floor muscles. 



'■30k 




MjdxrlxraicjtzAl 













Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 9: Hatha Yoga, Pranayama, Nada, Mudra, Bandha 


5. Wall-Boat 



Method: 

A) Lie on the back, with knees bent and the soles of 
the feet placed against the wall (shins parallel to the 
floor). 

B) Slowly inhale and exhale while pressing the lower 
back firmly against the floor. 

C) Contract and relax the sphincter muscles around 
the generative organ. Breathe normally. 

D) Slowly exhale and slightly curl the head, shoul¬ 
ders and upper back off the floor. 

E) Slowly inhale and roll the spine back to the rug 
(or mat). Repeat the entire process from 2 to 10 times 
(as strength returns). 

Benefits: This pose tones and strengthens the abdomi¬ 
nal muscles; it also removes lower back pain. The 
contraction increases circulation and healing, restores 
lost sensation, tightens organ muscles, and strength¬ 
ens the pelvic floor muscles. 

6. Knee-To-Chest 



Method: 

A) Lie on the mat or mg and bring the knees to the 
chest; wrap arms or hands around the knees. 

B) Slowly inhale, expanding the chest. Slowly ex¬ 
hale and press the lower back to the rug, pulling the 
knees closer to the chest. 

C) Bring the forehead towards the knees. 

D) Muscles around the spine may be massaged by 
gently rolling from side to side. Breathe normally. 

E) Contract and relax the sphincter muscles around 
the generative organ. 

Benefits: This pose eases lower and upper back 
tension. The contraction increases circulation, healing, 
restores lost sensation, tightens organ muscles, and 
strengthens the pelvic floor muscles. 


7. Easy Bridge Pose 



Method: 

A) Lie on the back, knees bent, soles flat on the floor, 
arms by the side. Feet are 6 to 8 inches apart. 

B) Contract and relax the sphincter muscles around 
the generative organ. 

C) Slowly inhale and relax the back. Then slowly 
exhale and flatten the lower back to the floor. 

D) While exhaling, lift the hips off the floor. The 
tailbone is curled upward (lift the pelvis higher than 
the abdomen) and squeeze the knees together 
(buttocks may also be squeezed). 

E) Slowly inhale, relaxing and lowering the buttocks 
to the floor. 

F) Repeat this pose again. 












The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Benefits: This pose strengthens the knees, buttocks, 
and abdominal muscles. The contraction increases 
circulation, healing, restores lost sensation, tightens 
organ muscles, and strengthens the pelvic floor 
muscles. 


9. Corpse Pose 



Method: Lie on back, with arms at the side and palms 
facing up. Breathe normally and feel the mind and 
body relax. 


Benefits: Body adjusts to its new tone, strength, and 
less stressful position. 

Important: Always end all asana routines with the 
corpse pose. 



Part 6 

Yoga for Children 

Children are 
naturally flexible, 
and generally have 
an innate sense of 
balance. Beginning 
asanas during child¬ 
hood will help main¬ 
tain health and flex- 


naturally curious to try asanas. Often they will want 
to follow along as parents practice their asanas. With 
a little encouragement and education of physical, 
mental, and spiritual health, children will quickly take 
to the postures. Explain the benefits of asana in terms 
they can understand, according to their age (teenag¬ 
ers can be told of the reduction of acne, improved 
concentration, and memory, etc.). Parents can help 
their youngsters attain these postures, making sure 
they do not strain or hurt themselves. 

To make the child’s cisana time more fun, parents 
can do two things. First, keep the sessions short, 
allowing for the child’s attention span. Second, 
suggest that they pretend to be different animals, and 
give them the an im al names of the asanas (e.g., lion, 
snake, cat, etc.). They can also pretend to be objects— 
e.g., the bridge. 

Pranayama breathing exercises are also good for 
children to learn. As they learn to breathe during the 
asanas, they will see how to take breaths from the 
lower abdominal cavity, rather than the chest. 

Various forms of meditation can be introduced as 
well. Children can begin to understand that meditation 
means anything that makes the mind quiet and 
relaxed. Sunrises and sunsets, nature walks, and 
thinking of God are all helpful. If children understand 
the importance of setting aside a quiet time each day 
and making this a daily habit, they will retain this 
habit throughout their teenage and adult years. 

Ethics and virtue are important principles that 
ensure sound health and longevity. If parents inculcate 
and exemplify these principles in daily life, children 
will better understand them and see these ideals in 
action. 

Lastly, proper Ayurvedic diet, using herbs and 
incorporating aroma and color therapies, will round 
out the healing and balancing of the five senses. So 
asanas, pranayam, meditation, ethics, and Ayurvedic 
life habits are the keys to a healthy childhood, and 
the foundations of a healthy and balanced adulthood. 



ibility during adult 
and later years. The 
open spiritedness of 
children makes them 













Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 9: Hatha Yoga, Pranayama, Nada, Mudra, Bandha 


Part 7 

Yoga for the Office 

Unless a company 
has an exercise 
room, finding 
adequate space and 
acceptance for 
practicing yoga 
asanas at work is 
unlikely. Yet, when 
stress becomes 
problematic, some 
stretching can be 
done surreptitiously. 

To increase the sense of relaxation, aromatherapy 
can also be used. Place essential oils on the third eye 
or under the nose, or put a drop of oil on a light bulb 
to let the aroma mildly permeate the room (e.g., 
sandalwood for stress, frankincense for alertness). 
Aromas or fragrant flowers balance one’s Ayurvedic 
mental constitution. The office can also host negative 
ion-producing herbs and plants (e.g., basil, com 
plants, etc.). They promote clarity and freshen the 
air. Color therapy may also be used. Colors also 
balance one’s emotional constitution. Paintings, rugs, 
flowers, wall paint, or other small items harmonize 
one’s emotions. 

Below are eight modified asanas that can be 
practiced—without being noticed—in the office. 
Correct posture is always helpful. There are some 
general guidelines for preventing excess stress. Sit 
up straight in your chair. Get up and walk around 
from time to time to keep the blood circulating and 
the body loose. Open the window for fresh air. Breathe 
properly: slow inhalations and exhalations can help 
calm the mind and body, and make it more alert, and 
can be done without calling attention to yourself. 
Rubbing the neck, shoulders, back, legs, and face will 
also invigorate the mind and body; increase 
circulation, and remove muscle tension and mental 
stress. One can invent stretches as well. Lastly, persons 
can practice two mudras: staring at the third eye, and 
a modified lion pose: 

1) Staring at the third eye with the chin lock 
improves concentration and keeps the brain nectar 


from diminishing. The mind, neck, and upper back 
will release tension. 

2) Sticking out the tongue (if it does not cause a 
scene), and/or making a yawning motion and facial 
contortions, will remove facial tension and keep 
wrinkles away. 

Those who can remove the left shoe in the office 
may consider a modified Siddhcisana/ Siddha Yoni 
Asana. Sit in your chair and place the left heel against 
the perineum or female generative organ. This will 
close the first chakra and keep your fife-force from 
escaping. This will bring about increased energy, 
balance, and concentration. 


1. Head/Neck Stretches 

Method: 

A) Lower the chin to the chest and rest for a few 
seconds, gently raise it, then gently lean it backwards. 
Hold for a few seconds and gently raise it upright. 

B) Turn the face to the left shoulder and gently lower 
the chin. Hold it for a few seconds, lift the chin, turn 
to look at the right shoulder and lower the chin again. 
Hold for a few seconds, slowly lift the chin and face 
forward. 



€°i 











The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 



A-2 



A-3 


D) Repeat A. 

Benefits: Removes neck and brain tension. 


2. Chest Expansion (Modified Fish Pose) 


Method: 

A) Sit on the edge of a 
desk or the arm of a 
couch with the arms be¬ 
hind the back and palms 
on the desk or the chair’s 
arm. 

B) Lean backwards and 
arch your chest outward, 
slowly breathing into 
the chest. 


Benefits: This stretch 
increases oxygen needed for concentration and for 
the removal of stress from the upper torso, arms, and 
neck. 



3. Spinal Twist 



A-4 


Method: Sit in a 
chair, with 
hands on the 
chair arms. Gen¬ 
tly twist to one 
side, and then 
the other. 



C) Face halfway between the front and left shoulder 
position, gently lower the chin and hold this posi¬ 
tion. Slowly raise the chin and then lean the head 
back in the opposite direction (midway between the 
back and the right shoulder). Hold and then return 
the head upright. Repeat in the opposite direction. 


Benefits: Re¬ 
leases stress 
from bad pos¬ 
ture, tones and 
loosens the 
spine, increases 
the flow of 
blood to the sys¬ 
tem; all this re¬ 
sults in improved clarity and concentration. 












Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 9: Hatha Yoga, Pranayama, Nada, Mudra, Bandha 


4. Lower Back Stretch 

Method: Sit up 
straight in a chair 
with hands on the 
knees. Press the 
palms against the 
knees, arching 
and stretching the 
lower back. Con¬ 
centrate on the 
lower back. (The 
chin lock can be 
also done.) 



Benefits: This 


eases lower back 


pain and prevents 

the life energy from flowing out of the body. The 
result is more energy and flexibility, improved con¬ 
centration and clarity. 


5. Leg Stretches 



Method : 

A) Stand up straight. 
Bend one leg until the 
ankle can be grabbed 
from behind. Gently pull 
the ankle close to the 
buttocks. Inhale and feel 
the stretch. Repeat with 
the other leg. 

B) Sitting in a chair, ex¬ 


tend one leg forward, parallel to the floor. Flex the 
toes up towards the ceiling and then downwards. 
Slowly inhale and feel the stretch in the calves. Re¬ 
peat with other foot. 

C) Slowly bend forward so long as you are 
comfortable, letting head and hands hang freely. Feel 
the release of stress from the face, arms, back, and 
shoulders. Also feel the stretch in the back of the 
thighs. 

Benefits: Leg stretching increases flexibility and 
circulation in the legs, reducing stress caused by sitting 
and work-related tension. 


6. ABC Stretch (Arm, Back, Chest) 


Method: Interlace fin¬ 
gers behind the back, 
slowly inhale while 
straightening arms and 
lifting them up to the 
ceiling and expanding 
the chest (i.e., arching 
the back). Hold and 
breathe normally. 

Benefits: Releases 
stress from the arms, 
shoulders, neck, and 
chest, caused by sit¬ 
ting, writing, poor pos¬ 
ture, and work-related 
stress. 



7. Isometrics 












The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Hands: Place the left palm across the inside of the 
right-hand fingers (palm to palm). Inhale and gently 
pull the left palm towards the body, stretching the 
fingers, hand, and wrist. Reverse the hand positions 
and repeat. 

Benefits: This releases stress from writing, typing, 
and clenching of hands. 


Arms: Interlace fingers and clasp hands together in 
front of the body. Push them together for several sec¬ 
onds, pull them apart (hands remain clasped). Try to 
lift one hand, then the other. Try to lower one hand, 
then the other. Stretch the arms outward and arch the 
back (caving in the chest) to stretch the pectorals and 
upper back. This can feel as though the body were 
yawning. (One may also keep the heel on the first 
chakra or, at least, contract the muscles in this area 
to prevent energy loss.) 

Benefits: Releases stress, tones muscles. 



Legs: 

A) Cross the 


left ankle 
over the 
right. Try to 
lift the right 
foot up, as 
the left foot 
holds it in 
place. Try to 
pull the feet 
apart while 
keeping the 
ankles 
crossed. Try 
to push the 
left foot to¬ 
ward the 

body while the right foot stops the movement. Re¬ 
verse the feet and repeat. 

B) Place feet beside one another and press the feet 
and knees together. 


Benefits: This stretch releases tension caused by sitting, 
improves flexibility, and ease. Isometrics are also very 
helpful on long plane flights to relieve stiffness. 


Foot massage rollers are available at many health 
food stores. A few seconds of rolling the feet on the 
wood will provide passive whole-body exercise, a 
release of stress, and help alleviate all digestive prob¬ 
lems. 


Part 8 

Yoga for the Elderly & Handicapped 

Those who have been practicing asanas since child¬ 
hood, teen years, or during 
their adulthood, will find it 
easier to continue their prac¬ 
tice into their later years. They 


can better gauge the need 
to take the postures more 
gently. When people over 
60 begin asanas for the first time, they need to start 
slowly and gently. They need to do modified, less 
strenuous postures. 

When people live for 60 or 70 years without us¬ 
ing stress-reducing methods, their bodies become stiff 
and brittle. This is certainly not a description of the 
‘golden years.’Yet, with even a little asana practice, 
symptoms of old age begin to disappear. The body 
has amazing healing powers, and asanas quickly 
begin to improve flexibility and to increase the vital¬ 
ity of physical and mental powers. People also have 
an increased interest in their spiritual fives. 








ncfgfonicaf 57 ^l 



































Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 9: Hatha Yoga, Pranayama, Nada, Mudra, Bandha 


When first beginning the postures, the body feels 
very stiff. Massaging the body with oils and taking a 
warm bath with Epsom salt will loosen the muscles. 
Alternatively, one may want to practice the asanas in 
the afternoon when the muscles are already loosened 
from the mornings activities. 

Most of the postures discussed earlier will 
remove symptoms of old age. Should they seem too 
strenuous, asanas can be modified for practice while 
sitting on a sturdy chair, leaning against a wall or on 
a sturdy table. People who have physical disabilities 
may work the parts of the body that are mobile, and 
even practice from a wheelchair. For muscles that 
may have become li mited or even paralyzed, massage 
provides a passive form of exercise. The main rule 
for elders and physically challenged people is to be 
gentle; do not force any pose beyond comfort. 

Pranayama is also useful for improving the body 
and lungs, and mental and spiritual peace (memory, 
concentration, and clarity). One’s Ayurvedic life 
habits (e.g., nutrition, herbs, color and aromatherapy, 
etc.) will further remove the limiting experiences of 
old age while helping develop longevity. Particularly, 
oil applications (abhyangas) help strengthen muscles 
and bones, improve circulation and heart strength, 
remove arthritis and other pains and diseases usually 
associated with old age, and regenerate the nerves 
and mental faculties. 

Traditionally in India, age 60 was when people 
completed their responsibilities of raising a family 
and making a contribution to society. Then they were 
given the time to explore their inner spiritual life. By 
age 70, they would naturally begin to realize the 
illusory nature of life and wholeheartedly seek God 
as the only true and eternal experience worth having. 
So, meditation for persons over 60 will have a most 
profound experience. Retiring from a job may mean 
an end of one career, but by no means does it mean 
that life is over. Another phase of life, rich in spiritual 
development, is in the offing. Along with this is the 
ability for elder people to be counselors to the younger 
generations who need life-experience guidance. 

Herbs that help slow and reverse the aging process 
include ashwagandha, shanka pushpl, brahml, 
jatamdhshi, etc. These herbs increase memory, 
concentration, mind-body coordination, build brain 
and nerve cells and tissues, and prevent senility. 


Ghee, sesame oil, shatavarl, etc., build and 
strengthen the ojas (life sap), immune system; nourish 
and moisten bones, preventing brittleness. Abhyahga, 
shiro dhara, shiro basti, and body massage with 
sesame oil provide passive exercise, increases 
circulation, and help remove arthritis and other pains 
and stiffness. 

By beginning or continuing asanas, pranayam, 
Ayurvedic life habits, and sadhana (meditation) 
during later years one will continue to heal, to avoid 
illness, to reduce the symptoms of old age, and to 
develop spirituality. Thus, Ayurveda helps make these 
years truly ‘golden’. 



Part 9 

Yoga for Digestive Disorders 

As discussed under the bow pose (p. 268), if the 
navel becomes displaced it creates all types of 
digestive disorders. To determine if the navel is 
displaced, one lies on their back with their legs 
extended straight out. Another person takes a string 
and measures from one big toe to the navel of the 
person lying down. Then, they measure from the other 
big toe to the navel. If the string differs in length then 
the navel is out of balance and can be helped by these 
specific asanas. 

Here, 3 postures are discussed that will properly 
center the navel. By practicing these three postures 
for 3 to 5 minutes daily, for 3 days, the navel will be 
returned to its normal position. Proper digestion will 
be noticed thereafter. 

Vi 





The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Bow 



Boat 

This is perhaps the most difficult of the three pos¬ 
tures; therefore, this pose is held only so long as it is 
comfortable. Make sure to breathe during the pose. 


BEGINNER POSE 



INTERMEDIATE POSE 


Method: 

A) Lay on back with arms by the sides. Legs are fully 
extended and together. 

B) Inhale, then exhale, slowly raising the head and 
upper chest off the ground. Simultaneously, lift the 
legs slightly off the floor (also keeping them together). 

C) Exhale, slowly returning to the prone position 
again. 



ADVANCED POSE 


The bow was discussed earlier. Parents can help 
babies and young children with the beginner’s bow. 

Method: For babies 

A) The child is placed on their belly with arms 
stretched over their head and legs straight out. 

B) Their wrists are gently pulled forward and upward 
so the upper torso is slightly off the ground (i.e., the 
navel is still on the ground). This position is held for 
3 minutes—or until the child begins to feel 
uncomfortable. 


Part 10 

Medical Definitions 

Throughout this section 
on yoga asanas, physiologi¬ 
cal effects of the postures 
were explained. The more 
important systems and or¬ 
gans are further defined be¬ 
low in modem medical ter¬ 
minology. 


Reticular Activating System: Controls the overall de¬ 
gree of central nervous system (CNS) activity. This 
relates to waking, sleeping, and clarity (alertness). 
This system influences the thalamus and hypothala¬ 
mus. 



Method: 

A) Lay on back with legs fully extended. 

B) Bend one knee and place the foot across the upper 
thigh of the extended leg. 

C) Gently press the bent knee to the ground and hold 
it for 3 to 5 minutes. 

D) Release and extend the leg; repeat with the other 
leg. 


Thalamus: Relays senses and connects with many 
brain areas including the cerebral cortex, basal gan¬ 
glia, hypothalamus and brain stem. It also senses pain, 
and is related to emotions and memory. 

Hypothalamus: 

Affects behavior —emotions, the subconscious, sen¬ 
sory-motor skills, intrinsic feelings of pleasure and 
pain, rage, fear. Affects physical functions —body tem- 
















Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 9: Hatha Yoga, Pranayama, Nada, Mudra, Bandha 


perature, weight, blood pressure, water metabolism, 
the cardiac system, urinary output, kidneys, hunger, 
sodium, negative ions, thirst, communicates with the 
cerebral cortex, pupil dilation, shivering, GI tract 
stimulation, thirst, satiety, sexual drive, alertness, body 
temperature, uterine contraction, and breast mi lk ejec¬ 
tion. 

Thyroid: Secretes the two main hormones that regu¬ 
late the metabolic rate and secretes a hormone for 
calcium metabolism. It affects proteins, cellular en¬ 
zymes, growth, cholesterol, triglycerides, phospho¬ 
lipids, arteriosclerosis, muscles, sleep, sexual func¬ 
tions, blood flow, cardiac output, and body weight. It 
also affects liver/fat deposits, metabolic rate, respira¬ 
tion, carbohydrates, vitamin metabolism, gastrointes¬ 
tinal functions, and the CNS . 

Autonomic Nervous System: Partially or wholly af¬ 
fects—psychosomatic conditions, visceral organs, 
blood pressure, urinary bladder, GI tract, sweat, body 
temperature, bronchi, and kidneys. It also affects skel¬ 
etal motor nerves, blood, mind, nose, eyes, lungs, 
small intestine, colon, liver, gall bladder, and the pi¬ 
tuitary gland. 

Parasympathetic Nervous System: This system af¬ 
fects the iris/eyes, nose, lungs, liver, gall bladder, and 
the male generative organ. 

Endocrine Glands: The glands secrete hormones that 
affect growth, thyroid, pancreas, ovaries, testes, par¬ 
athyroid, placenta, RNA, gonads, antidiuretic, and the 
pituitary. 


Pituitary Gland: This gland is connected to the hypo¬ 
thalamus. Most pituitary secretions are controlled by 
hormonal or nervous signals from the hypothalamus. 
Other secretions come from within the gland and re¬ 
lease or inhibit secretions. It affects amino acids, car¬ 
bohydrates, hair, gonads, breast milk, metabolism, 
milk, antidiuretic, thyroid, growth, proteins, mam¬ 
mary glands, glucose, insulin diabetes, water metabo¬ 
lism, and kidneys. 


Suggested Reading 

Gray H. Gray’s Anatomy. Philadelphia, PA: 
Running Press; 1974 

Guyton A. Textbook of Medical Physiology. 

Philadelphia, PA: Saunders Press; 1981. Jor¬ 
dan S. Yoga For Pregnancy. New York, 

NY: St. Martin’s Press; 1987. 

Iyengar BKS. Light On Yoga. New York, NY: 

Shocken Books; 1976. 

Saraswati Swami Muklebodhandana, trans. 

Hatha Yoga Pradlpika. Bihar, India: Bihar 
School of Yoga;1985. 

Shivananda Yoga Center. Shivananda Companion To 
Yoga. New York, NY: Fireside/Simon 
& Schuster; 1983. 

Tirtha Swami Shankar Purushottam. Yoga Vani. 
Bayville, NY: Ayurveda Holistic Center 
Press; 1990. 

Vasu RBSC. (trans.) Gheranda Samhitd. New 
Delhi, India: Oriental Books Reprint Corp.; 

1980 










The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 















Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 10: Sound Therapy: Mantras, Chakras, & Music 


Like salt that is tasted in water 
though we cannot see it, 
so too, merging into Brahman 
we are everywhere, but we cannot see it. 

Vedic saying 


Chapter 10 

Sound Therapy: Mantras, Chakras, & Music 


n the last chapter, we briefly discussed 
sound (ncida). In the present chapter we in¬ 
vestigate the entire realm of sound as a heal¬ 
ing therapy for physical, mental, and spiritual disor¬ 
ders. 

All of life is vibration: color, matter, energy par¬ 
ticles; even love has a vibration or feeling. The Vedas 
state that creation arises from the first sound of the 
universe, the primordial sound Aum. The definition 
of mantra varies because there are so many types of 
mantras: Ayurvedic, astrological, deities, seed (bija) 
mantras, and the l ik e. Many books about mantras 
exist as well. A special group of mantras are Guru 
mantras. These are words enlivened by the spiritual 
teacher to awaken our inner kundalinl shakti and de¬ 
velop our spiritual growth of Self-Realization. Dif¬ 
ferent Gurus use different mantras; some use mean¬ 
ingless sounds, some use musical sounds, some use 
the mantra aum, aum namah Sivaya, hang sah; and 
others use name-symbol or deity mantras. It is be¬ 
lieved that any words the Gum speaks to a person are 
mantras or awakeners of kundalinl. If the Guru says, 
“eat an apple,” that would be a mantra for that mo¬ 
ment. Some gurus use only the playing of music to 
realize the Divine. Some meditate on the Divine as 
unmanifest, formless. 

Sound itself belongs to the element of ether, the 
origin of all the other elements. By calming and awak¬ 
ening the inner self through sound, a person can calm, 
harmonize, and balance all the elements that are in 
his or her life. 


30 (“AUM’ ’, THE 1ST SOUND OF THE UNIVERSE) 


Guru Mantras 

Mantra is that which saves us from the work¬ 
ings of the mind. Thought or meditation vanishes 
with the stopping of mental activities. With the stop¬ 
ping of mental activities, yoga is 

attained, which is nothing but self 
concentration or self centeredness. 

Yoga Vani (Discourse 3) 

L ife-breath—or Soul (Kundalinl Shakti )—is the 
mantra, the savior of the mind, because mind is a 
vibration of fife-breath. When the life-breath flows 
through the sushumnd (a mystical tube within the 
spine) to the crown of the head, the mind becomes 
fixed in the Brahmaranclhra, within the crown chakra 
(Sahasrdrara), and it disappears, becoming calm, 
peaceful, or inactive. Thus, the mantra is nothing but 
the breath of fife. 

This life-breath, when exhaled, makes the sound 
‘Hang,’ and when inhaled, makes the sound ‘Sah’. 
This mantra occurs in all creatures 21,600 times daily 
over the entire 24 hour period. Those of keen yogic 
awareness can actually hear this sound. This Gdyatrl 
or mantra is known as ajapa, and is the giver of 
salvation to Yogis. Gdyatrl originates at the 
muladhara —or base chakra, has a dot-like 
appearance, and sustains the Self. Ndda —or sound— 
evolves from this imperceptible kundalinl sprout. 
Yogis perceive this sound as a sprout from an invisible 
seed. As it moves to the navel, it can yogically be 
perceived as visible rumbling, as if from the clouds. 
It then moves up to the heart as unstruck sound, and 
is finally heard in the throat so as to produce 







The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


all sounds, alphabets, words, sentences, mantras, 
scriptures, etc. So all mantras emanate from ncicla — 
or sound, originating at the first chakra. 

Mantras, to be successful, must be enlivened or 
animated; this occurs by waking the kundalini shakti. 
Generally, it is believed that one needs a Guru to 
enliven the word or mantra. Otherwise, everyone 
could refer to a book or go to a religious service and 
feel the awakening of life within. Some rare 
individuals, who have developed much spiritual 
sincerity and earnestness, can enliven mantras for 
themselves, but this is rare. 

In the book Yoga Vani there is a discussion of the 
benefits of name-symbol mantras. The importance 
of the mantra is the deity established by it. Mantra is 
the attribute and deity is the goal. Just as the term 
“sun” and its effulgence have a relationship, so the 
mantra and its deity have a connection. Mantra and 
its deity meditation, bring concentration through 
meditation, and the result is that the deity is revealed 
in the Soul. 


Awakening Kundalini 

Like a double-tongued snake, kundalini (the 
essential life force) has two mouths: internal and 
external. One mouth is stuck in the internal sushumnd 
(a spiritual tube, running up the spine) that leads to 
Self-Realization. The other mouth is open to the 
external passage. This is why we are aware of the 
world and why we breathe; and this is why we see 
the diversity of life. When, through the grace of a 
Guru, the kundalini is awakened, it may appear as a 
flash of lightning. Once awakened, the kundalini 
gradually rises up the sushumnd. It cleanses karmic 
sludge out of the spine and the chakras, just as a hot 
iron rod cleanses the dirt from a hookah pipe tube. 
Persons may have experienced quivering, shaking 
movements of the body, or suspension of breath 
during meditation. This is the experience of the 
kundalini shakti cleansing the inner tube and chakras. 



Ayurvedic Healing Mantras 

Healing sounds balance both the mind and body, 
as well as the spirit. Practitioners find that imparting 
Ayurvedic mantras helps heal their clients. Mantras 
also help balance prana, tejas, and ojas. They help 
harmonize nerve tissue, and they clear subtle 
impurities from the nerves and nadls (subtle 
channels). These mantras also aid one’s concentration 
and creative thinking. 

Both practitioner and client use the mantras during 
a session. They empower all actions on a subtle level, 
infusing the cosmic life force into the healing process. 
Generally, Vdyu doshas mentally repeat mantras, 
while Pitta and Kapha doshas may also chant them. 
Kaphas do particularly well with chanting; it is 
suggested that they do so on a daily basis. 

Aum: (long “ahh”, then ‘um’ as in home) Most 
important, for it represents the Divine word, serving 
to eneigize or empower all things and processes. This 
is why all mantras begin and end with aum. Best for 
males. 

Uses: It clears the mind, opens nadls, and increases 
ojas. It awakens one’s prana —or positivity—needed 
for healing to occur. 

Ram: (“a” sounds like the “a” in “calm”) 

Uses: Brings Divine protection (light and grace), 
giving strength, calm, rest, peace; good for mental 
disorders and high Vayu (e.g., insomnia, bad dreams, 
nervousness, anxiety, excessive fear, and fright); it 
strengthens ojas and builds the immune system. 

Hoom: 

Uses: It wards off negative influences, which are 
manifested as diseases, negative emotions, or black 
magic. Hoom awakens agni and promotes digestive 
fire. It bums up dma and clears channels; it increases 
tejas and mental perception, and it is sacred to Shiva 
as the sound of Divine wrath. 

Aym: 

Uses: Improves mental concentration, thinking, 
rational powers, and speech; awakens and increases 
intelligence, mental and nervous disorders; restores 






Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 10: Sound Therapy: Mantras, Chakras, & Music 


speech, communication, control of senses and mind; 
is the sacred sound of Saraswati, the Goddess of 
Wisdom. 

Shrim: 

Uses: Promotes general health, beauty, creativity, 
prosperity, strengthens rasa (plasma) and shukra (re¬ 
productive fluids), and overall health and harmony. 

Hrim: 

Uses: Cleanses and purifies, giving energy, joy, and 
ecstasy. Although it initially causes atonement; it also 
aids detoxification. 

Krim: 

Uses: Gives capacity for work and action; adds power 
and efficacy, good for chanting while making prepa¬ 
rations. 


Mantras for the 5 Elements 

One can strengthen the five elements through their 
mantras: Lam —Earth, Vam —Water, Ram —Fire, 
Yam —Air, Ham —Ether (“a” is a short sound, like 
the “e” in “the”) and will strengthen the systems they 
govern. 

Lam: Root chakra, excretory system, stabilizes 
Apdna Vayu, grounds, stabilizes, calms, brings joy, 
happiness, and contentment. 

Vam: Sex chakra and urogenital system; helps 
balance water metabolism, gives creativity, fertility, 
and imagination. 

Ram: (pronounced like “but”) navel chakra and solar 
plexus; increases agni, will, perception, energy, and 
motivation. 


Klim: K+ 

Uses: Gives strength, sexual vitality, control of emo¬ 
tions, increases shukra and ojas. 

Sham: Mantra of peace (or ‘Aum shanti, shanti, 
shanti ’) 

Uses: Creates calmness, detachment, contentment; 
alleviates mental and nervous disorders, stress, anxi¬ 
ety, disturbed emotions, tremors, shaking, palpita¬ 
tions, and chronic degenerative nervous system dis¬ 
orders. 


Yam: Heart chakra and circulatory system; gives 
energy and enthusiasm. 

Ham: Throat chakra and respiratory system; gives 
breath and prana. 

Ksham: Third eye (ajha) and mind; gives 
concentration, peace, stability, and calm to the mind. 

Aum: Head center, awakens deeper consciousness, 
giving full expansion of consciousness. 


Shum: (pronounced like “shoe” but with a shorter 
vowel sound) 

Uses: Increases vitality, energy, fertility, sexual vigor, 
mantra for increasing shukra. 


Som: (as in home) 

Uses: Increases energy, vitality, joy, delight, creativ¬ 
ity, ojas; it strengthens mind, heart, nerves, and is 
good for rejuvenation and to nif ication therapies. 



Dosha Mantras 

Vayu: Mantras need to be soft, warm, soothing, 
calming. They should not be chanted aloud or for too 
long, as this may deplete their energy. Chanting may 
be done for a few minutes, then continued mentally. 
Precaution: Aum chanted in excess increases Vayu 
(air and ether). 

Best: Ram, Hoorn 


Pitta: Mantras must be cool, soothing, and calming. 
Best: Aum, Aim, Shrim, Sham 


gi'h 










The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Kapha: Does best with chanting or singing; needing 
warm, stimulating, and activating ones. Best: Hoom, 
Aum, Aym 

Mantra Applications 

For Practitioners: 

1. During the session, purify healing room using 
Aum and Hoom. 

2. Bring Divine light into room using Aum and 
Ram. 

3. Chant mentally over the client to clear their 
psychic level using Aum. 

4. Energize the healing power of herbs or 
medicines using Krlm or Shrlm. 

For Clients: 

They can make use of these mantras at home to 
increase healing. 

Mental or nervous disorders: 

Sham —relieves pain and fever. Hoom —restores 
nerve function and counters paralysis. 

Som —rebuilds cerebrospinal fluid 


Round and round the circle 

Completing the charm So 
the knot be unknotted The 
crossed be uncrossed 

The crooked be made straight And the curse be 
ended 

T.S. Elliot 


Part 2 

The Life-Breath & Chakras 

Fif e-breath is the main energy in the physical body. 
All 14 sense organ energies are manifestations (i.e., 


eye, ear, nose, etc.) of the life-breath. The life-breath 
has different names when doing different functions, 
just as one person can be an employee, a parent, or a 
child. For example, when the life-breath flows through 
the optic nerves in the eye, it has the function (en¬ 
ergy) of vision. If the flow of life-breath is blocked, 
sight is impaired. Thus, the various sense organs are 
infused by the one life-breath. 

When the life-breath, which is drawn in different 
directions through the different channels, is directed 
by yoga or union (devotional Sadhana) to flow 
through the sushumna —or spiritual tube within the 
spine, Pure Knowledge is developed and one gains 
Self-Realization. All the other channels are for en¬ 
joyment. Deep inside the sushumna he the chakras 
(energy centers). They are visible only through the 
spiritual eye. 

Some say there are 350,000 channels, some say 
72,000 channels. There are 15 main channels; the 3 
most important of which are discussed here: the 
sushumna, kid, and pihgald. 

Sushumna is the most important channel, resting in 
the spine at the back of the body. It is experienced as 
brilliantly as the sun, moon, and fire; possessing 
sattwa, rajas, and tamas. It begins at the chakra at 
the base of the spine, the muladhara, and extends to 
the sahasrdra — thousand-petaled lotus at the crown 
of the head. Inside the sushumna is a finer nadl —or 
channel—called bajra. Bajra is seen like a blazing 
flame that enters from the swadhisthan lotus or sexual 
organ. Inside the bajra nadl is yet a finer nadl (chan¬ 
nel) called chitrini. Chitrini is said to be as line as a 
spider’s web. Along this nadl mn the six lotuses or 
chakras, extending from the base of the spine 
(muladhara) to a little beyond the spiritual eye—or 
djhd chakra. Devotees or yog is are said to be the only 
ones who see this nadl. Within the chitrini nadl is 
still another nadl, the white colored Brahmanadi. It 
is resplendent, running from muladhara base chakra 
to the crown chakra, sahasrdra. This nadl is seen as 
a flash of lightning and is the fountain of pure knowl¬ 
edge and eternal delight. 

The kid nadl (sometimes called the moon chan¬ 
nel) begins from the muladhara lotus. It is found on 
the left side of the spine and encircles the chakras. It 
ends above the djhd or spiritual lotus, to the extrem¬ 
ity of the left nostril. Pihgald 





Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 10: Sound Therapy: Mantras, Chakras, & Music 


(sometimes called sun channel) begins similarly on 
the right side. It goes on and ends similarly to the Ida, 
ending above the extreme right nostril. Breath 
generally flows through the right or left channels; 
rajas or tamas prevail respectively. Through 
devotional sadhana, life-breath flows through the 
sushumna (sattwic predominance), the mind becomes 
concentrated, and real meditation begins. 

The remaining 12 major channels begin ostly 
at the navel: 

Two channels go to the eyes. 

Two channels go to the ears. 

One channel goes to the extremity of the nose. 

One channel goes to the stomach to digest four 
ki nds of food (masticated, sucked, licked, 
drunk). 

One (Saraswati) goes to the tip of tongue, resulting 
in perception of taste and expression of words. 
One channel produces sneezing. 

One channel moves from the throat, taking the 
essence of food to the brain. (From the navel, 

3 channels go downwards as well). 

One channels goes to the anus to purge. 

Two channels go to the genitals to excrete urine 
and one to discharge semen. 

Below is a discussion of the experiences of the 
chakras according to Swann Shankar Purushottam 
Tlrtha, from his book, Yoga Bani (Instructions for 
the Attainment of Siddhayoga). 

1st or Muladhara Chakra: Experience of this 
chakra brings fulfillment of all desires, reveals the 
whole universe, makes one versed in the Shastras 
(texts of wisdom), makes one pure and hale, and is 
considered great among people. It is seen as fresh 
lightning. It is found at the base of the spine, between 
the anus and genitals. 

2nd or Swadhishthana Chakra: Opening of this 
chakra annihilates passions such as pride. It is found 
at the root of the genitals. 


chakra increases digestive power. It eases difficult 
breathing. Excess Kapha is removed from the body. 
One also can hear inner sound (nada) by concen¬ 
trating here. 

4th or Anahata Chakra: At the heart, when opened, 
grief and fear vanish through the grace of the Holy 
Preceptor. One also can hear the Hafigsah mantra, 
and the heart’s desires are fulfilled. One gains 
command over speech, controls all senses and 
passions, can enter other bodies, and can create, 
preserve, and destroy this world. 

5th or Vishuddha Chakra: Located in the throat, 
once opened, if the yogi is angered, the three worlds 
are shaken. One becomes a poet, a wise person, 
peaceful in mind, is free from disease and sorrow, 
and is long lived. 

6th or Lalana Chakra: Located in the palate, if 
concentration on this chakra occurs, fever, Pitta 
insanity, and the like are cured. 

7th or Ajfia Chakra: Located in the middle of the 
brow, once opened, annihilation of desires occurs. 
One becomes equal to Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiva. 
Food is taken in smaller quantities, and one passes 
less stool and urine. This chakra is also called the 
heart. Above the djhd is the confluence of ida, pihgalci, 
and sushumna (discussed above). 

8th or Manas Chakra: Found a little above the djhd. 
Here is the inner Soul, as knowledge and the 
knowable. One can see the letter aum. 

9th or Soma Chakra: Located a little above manas, 
when open, a person gains patience, grieflessness, 
stability, gravity, concentration, and other similar 
mental strengths. 

Just above this chakra is the region of no sup¬ 
port. Here air becomes stable without breathing or 
holding breath. Here all sense of physical 



3rd or Manipura Chakra: Located at the root of 
the navel. Opening of this chakra gives one the 
ability to create, preserve, and destroy; speech 
never fails this person. Concentration on this 








The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


existence vanishes. Perception of the eternal Self as 
most beautiful, pure and serene is then experienced. 
Everything is the Self and the Self is everything. 

Sahasrara Chakra: Beyond all chakras, the place 
of supreme perception, the site of Self-ab-sorption 
(Nirbikalpa Samadhi), persons experience the 
stopping of all sensory functioning. The devotee is 
united with the One Universal Soul or Brahma. 
Lassitude, decrepitude, and other diseases disappear, 
and one feels supreme delight. One experiences 
Nirvana Shakti, mother of the three worlds. In utmost 
intimacy. She is thus experienced. No words can 
describe this experience. One experiences only vital 
force in various forms. Only new knowledge occurs, 
no physical attributes are noticed. 

fso vjjb vjjb 

Our sages developed music from time immemorial 
for the mind to take shelter in that pure Being, 
which stands apart as one’s true Self 

Real music is not for wealth, not for honors, 
or not even for the joys of the mind - 
it is one kind of yoga, 
a path for realization and salvation, 
to purify your mind and heart 
and give you longevity 

Ali Akbar Khan 


music was a path for the musically inclined to reach 
God. The music teacher was the guru. By following 
the guru’s musical instruction, the student or disciple 
also learned a spiritual lesson. The musical path to¬ 
wards Self-Realization was one lacking intellectual 
analysis or discussion. Merely by playing music, one 
would gradually merge with the eternal Divinity. The 
basic learning precept was, “shiksha, diksha, 
parlksha”: learning, dedicated practice, evaluation. 
Below is a discussion of classical North Indian mu¬ 
sic. 

The traditional learning method was to live near 
the guru’s home and spend each day in theory, vocal 
music classes, and so forth. Like all forms of Vedic 
learning, originally the teaching of music was an oral 
tradition, passed on from teacher to student. The 
teacher was always there to correct the student’s per¬ 
formance or understanding of the music (rags —a 
melody base or form over which the musician may 
improvise). Students practiced small sections of the 
music until they gradually learned the entire song. 

Today, unless one lives in India, finding such a 
teacher with whom to study is difficult. In the United 
States, although there are teachers with whom per¬ 
sons may study (usually for hourly classes), it is more 
likely that the aspiring musician will resort to books, 
audio tapes, and video cassettes that are available for 
self-instruction. An extremely devoted musician can 
study with some of the great Indian virtuosos who 
five in or visit the US. 


Part 3 

Music Therapy 

From the earliest 
days in India, music 
was another form of 
attaining spiritual 
union, practiced by 
musicians without any 
thought of worldly 
gains. Music was 
found in the temples, 
sung as bhajans (devotional songs) in ashrams, and 
used by saints as a means of expression. Yet it was 
also found in the theater and the army tents. In short, 


The Indian music scale has certain similarities to 


Western music. 


Sanskrit 

English 

Sanskrit 

English 

Sa 

C 

Ma 

F# 

ri 

c# 

Pa 

G 

Ri 

D 

dha 

G# 

ga 

D# 

Dha 

A 

Ga 

E 

ni 

A# 

ma 

F 

Ni 

B 

















Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 10: Sound Therapy: Mantras, Chakras, & Music 


Classical Indian music (rags) has a great depth 
of healing and mind-balancing abilities. Each rag has 
its own mood, its own time of day, and its own sea¬ 
son in which to be played. 

Music is rhythm; in tune, 
it gives you food for your soul 

Ali Akbar Khan 

About 75,000 rags exist, grouped under 10 parent 
scales, but each musician will have their own 
interpretation of the songs. The original treatises of 
classical Indian music are Ndtyashtdstra, 
Naradakshiksa, Dattilam, Bridahhesi, and 
Sangltaratndkara. 

Each rag has a time of day or season associated 
with it. Rags are usually based on 3-hour intervals 
(prahars or watches). 

Midnight - 3:00 a.m. Noon - 3:00 p.m. 3:00 a.m. 
- 6:00 a.m. 3:00 p.m. - 6:00 p.m. 6:00 a.m. - 
9:00 a.m. 6:00 p.m. - 9:00 p.m. 9:00 a.m. - Noon 
9:00 p.m. - Midnight 

Rag times are also adjusted for seasonal changes. 
Some rags are very specific. Some are played when 
the first ray of the sun is seen (i.e., rag Ahir Bhairav). 
Others are played when the sky first reddens in the 
late afternoon (i.e., rag Purvi). Still others are 
performed when the first candles are lit in the evening 
(i.e., rag Bhimpalashri). Some rags are played at 
different times of the day (during the morning, 
afternoon, evening, and night). 


Rags emote many moods and effects; joy and 
love, pathos, compassion, or sadness. Other emotions 
include heroism, courage or valor, merriment and 
laughter, wonder or surprise, anger or rage, disgust, 
fear. 

Today, many Indian and American musicians are 
blending the classical Indian music with jazz or new- 
age music, and developing unique new sounds. The 
serious musician should read The Classical Music of 
North India, by Ali Akbar Khan. Another source of 
Indian music training is the out-of-print collection of 
audio lessons, Learning Indian Music, by Ravi 
Shankar. 

Audiotapes and CD’s of these classical rags are 
available through Indian grocery stores and through 
the Ali Akbar College in San Francisco, California. 
Rags are useful in helping attune oneself to the natural 
rhythms of the day and season, and enhance 
meditation and peace of mind. 


Once King Akbar asked his court musician 
‘Tansen ’ to bring his teacher, Swami Haridass ’, to 
sing for him. The musician said that Akbar would 
have to visit the forest because Swdmijl did not visit 
anyone. Further, Akbar had to disguise himself as a 
servant. In the presence of the Swami, the musician 
intentionally sang a rag incorrectly, and the Swami 
sang it to show him his error. The musician then turned 
to the king and said, “I sing for men, but Swdmijl 
sings only for God.” 


Sample of Classical Indian Instruments 



Dhapli 




Dholak 








The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 



Tablas 


Mridangam 




















Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 11: Color and Gem Therapies 


People are bound by rites and freed by knowledge, 
thus the sages have known this truth 
do not perform rites. 

Upanishadic wisdom 


Chapter 11 

Color & Gem Therapies 


erbs and food bring balance through the sense 
1 W of taste. Abhyahga achieves balance through 

4 the sense of touch. 

Aromatherapy heals through the sense of smell. Color 
therapy balances the doshas (mentally or psychically) 
through the sense of sight. Colors are absorbed pri¬ 
marily through the eyes or Alochak Pitta (and sec¬ 
ondarily through the skin or Bhrajak Pitta). It is a 
crucial part of subtle mental and prdnic life-force 
nutrition as it energizes the nerves (which stimulate 
the mind). Besides absorbing colors, the mind and 
body produce them as well, adding the powers of 
digestion. 

Tejas: Mental fire, or tejas, is the major realm that 
color therapy affects most. Bright colors increase 
tejas, and dark colors diminish it. However, if colors 
are too bright, tejas becomes burnt out (psychedelic 
drugs have this affect also), and disharmonious or 
clashing colors derange tejas. So tejas can be bal¬ 
anced by the right use of colors. To increase tejas, 
one meditates on a ghee flame or golden light. White 
or deep blue color reduces excess tejas, and green 
balances it. 

Just as the choice of foods either balances or de¬ 
ranges the body’s health, one’s choice of colors acts 
similarly. Colors provide emotional strength and cre¬ 
ativity. If misused, colors can cause a disturbance or 
depression (i.e., bright colors stimulate emotions and 
energy, dark colors suppress emotions and reduce 
energy—although they can also calm certain indi¬ 
viduals). Healing psychological diseases is greatly 
assisted through color therapy. 

Physically, color stimulates digestion, circulation, 
improves vitality, increases overall physical activity, 


and most of all, energizes blood 

(Ranjak Pitta). However, if colors inappropriate for 
the constitution are used, they weaken the circula¬ 
tion, depress the appetite, increase toxins in the blood, 
or cause mental hyperactivity. Colors act like gems; 
they strengthen the aura and astral body. This is the 
realm of pure color, and is suitable for subtle or spiri¬ 
tual healing. 

Applied Color Therapy 

The use of colors in one’s daily life adds psycho¬ 
logical harmony and peace of mind. Below are vari¬ 
ous methods of how color therapy is used. 

Since color is so important, 

-Use colored lamps, either by placing colored 
glass over light bulbs or by buying colored 
bulbs. 

-Use soft lights instead of fluorescent or neon. 
-Use full-spectrum lights in the winter (when 
there is less sunlight) to alleviate depression. 
-Use mild and harmonious shades. 

-Bathe the whole body or specific parts with 
various colored lights. For example, use dark 
blue light for inflammation, infection, or 
rheumatoid arthritis on the hands (use smaller bulbs 
for application on specific sites). 

-Choose the colors of your surroundings— 
clothes, home furnishings, car, office, bed¬ 
room—with care. 

-Note exposure to colors in nature: sky blue, 
ocean blue/green/ turquoise, white snow or 
moonlight, plush green trees, shrubs and grass; 


Oh 






The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


colorful flowers; meditate on colorful flowers 
such as a white lily, red rose or hibiscus, yellow 

chrysanthemum, or sunflower, blue iris. 
-Meditate on stained glass, art, manclalas. 
-Visualize colors in your mind. 

Nature \s own colors are the most beneficial, 
nourishing and strengthening 

The Use of Colors 

Color therapy affects the mind more than it affects 
the body. Thus, there is greater consideration of the 
sattwic, rajasic, and tamasic effects of colors, even 
more than their effect on the physical constitution. 

Sattwa: All colors have shades that are sattwic, 
rajasic, or tamasic, so it is important to use only the 
sattwic shades—those shades that bring joy, harmony, 
and serenity. The best colors are white, gold, violet, 
and blue. 

Rajas: Colors—bright, loud, flashy, artificial 
(i.e., neon signs), and rajasic shades—bright, metallic, 
penetrating, are sometimes useful when there is low 
or inert energy. Combinations of opposite colors can 
also be too stimulating and irritating (i.e., blue/yellow, 
red/green). Rajasic colors are yellow, orange, red, 
purple. 

Tamas: Colors are dull, dark, turbid, and muddy 


(i.e., stagnant green). They cause the mind and senses 
to become heavy, inert, and congested. Tamasic colors 
are brown, black, and 

gray. 

White and black are not really considered colors, 
but the polar opposites of light and dark, from which 
color is produced. Below is a list of colors. When 
healing, one should use primary colors in their most 
characteristic shades. 

Color Therapy, Spirituality and Astrology 

Vedic scriptures state that what is in the heavens 
and on the earth is also in humans. Furthermore, since 
humans, mother earth, and the universe are 
interrelated, they are linked together like strands of a 
web. Thus, it is natural to find a connection between 
colors, the heavens, and their effects on humankind. 

In the Vedic texts on astrology (Jyotish) and 
architecture (Vdstu Shdstra), the colors are another 
name for different deities. The 7 colors of the spectrum 
(red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo, violet) are 
said to be the 7 rays, or deities, of the sun (Surya), 
only in the reverse order. 

According to Vdstu Shdstra, through proper 
positioning of one’s house and building materials, 
the seen and unseen solar rays (i.e., colors) positively 
affect the dweller’s health. It is a fascinating field of 
study in itself (see Chapter 27). 









Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 11: Color and Gem Therapies 


Gray 

Uses: Gives objectivity, neutrality, reduces emotion and sensation 

Precautions: Can be depressing or devitalizing 

Brown: 

Uses: Grounds, stabilizes, neutralizes 

Earthy 

Precautions: May make one's personality coarser 

Red 

Uses: Warm shades-energy, warmth, strengthens the heart, blood, circulation, will, energy 


(in excess) 

Pitta/Agni/- Precautions: Promotes hostility, anger, violence, (the strongest of all colors), used with black, creates 


Tejas + 

rajasic and tamasic effects 

Orange: 

Uses: Energizing, intelligence, illumination, paralysis, thyroid, menstrual cramps 

VK- P 

Precautions: On a lower level, it can aggravate the second or sex chakra 

Yellow: 

Uses: Motivation, energy, clarity, communication, nervous system, arthritis, brain 

VK- P+ 

Precautions: May make one superficial or hyperactive 

Green: 
VP- 
K+ (in 

Uses: Harmonizes, life-giving, calms the mind, nerves, fever, acidity, headache; balances the 
metabolism, stabilizes weight, tones liver and spleen; pituitary 

excess) 

Precautions: Increases Kapha when used in excess 

Blue: 

Spiritual Uses: Promotes solitude, meditation, and independence 

V- (sky 

blue) 
PVK+ (in 

Uses: Helps reduce tumors, congestion, fevers, and infections (natural antibiotic), neutralizes anger 
and hatred, cools the mind and eyes, sleep, pineal gland 

excess) 

Precaution: Excess blue can make one overly cold-natured 

Purple: 

Uses: Gives authority, prestige, and distance, reduces heart pain, stiffness, cysts 

Precautions: May stagnate or suppress emotions-especially anger 

Violet: 

Uses: Detachment and devotion, antibiotic, builds white corpuscles in spleen 

Precautions: Same as purple 

Gold: 

Spiritual Uses: Increases Self-consciousness 

VK- P+ 

Uses: Harmonizes the mind and strengthens the heart, ojas, immune, endocrine systems 

Spiritual Uses: Promotes purity, virtue, spirituality 

White: 
VP- K+ 

Uses: Nurturing, heals fevers, infections and pain, calms the heart, mind, nerves and emotions, 

promotes vitality and supportive feelings 

Precaution: In excess causes passivity, lethargy, hypersensitivity, and inhibitions 

Spiritual Uses: Spiritual color for some religions/sign of death for others 

Black: 

PVK+ 

Uses: Promotes resistance, obstruction, opposition, enmity, hatred wards off and distances negative 

emotions 


Precaution: Increase fear and suspicion and paranoia 

V = Vayu, P = Pitta, K = Kapha means reduces; '+' means increases 


































The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Vayu 

Balances: Gold, red, orange, yellow, white, emerald green, sky blue, pink 

Aggravates: Overly bright, flashy colors (red, purple), overly dark colors 

Good Shapes: Round, soft, square, balanced 

Pitta 

Balances: White, green, blue, mild, pastels 

Aggravates: Reds, oranges, yellows, golds 

Good Shapes: Avoid angles, sharp or penetrating forms 

Kapha 

Balances: Reds, golds, yellows, oranges are most balancing 

Aggravates: Whites, pinks, other whitish colors 

Good Shapes: Pyramid, angular; avoid vertical, round, or square 


Astrological-Gem Therapies 

All human activities are meant for the 
happiness of all living beings; 
such happiness is based on dharma, 
(righteousness). Hence, everyone is 
advised to always be righteous. 

- Ashtanga Hridayam 
Su: Ch. 1; ver. 20 


Part 2 Gem 
Therapy 

Jyotish is the 

Vedic 

astrological system, 
of which Ayurveda 
was once a part. This 
astrological system 
notes that gems are related to the various planets and 
produce a balancing effect to counter specific dis¬ 
eases. It is a primary method of a Jyotish astrologer’s 
therapeutic measures to heal physical, mental, and 
spiritual situations, based on one’s astrology chart 
indicators. It is known that planets produce effects in 


humans. For example, the full moon not only causes 
high tides, but also affects the emotions of some 
people. The gemstones were studied and used to neu¬ 
tralize these effects. 

The ancient Ayurvedic researchers studied 
healing properties of gems, and found that different 
stones created different effects in the human body. 
The planets were seen to have corresponding colors. 
The color or vibration of the gems affects the human 
body. They absorb and reflect (like a filter) the 
planetary rays or vibrations. Thus, gems relate to 
specific energy waves. It was found that the gems 
associated with each planet have varying wave 
lengths. 

The planetary vibrations are negative, while the 
radiation of the stones is positive. When the positive 
and negative vibrations are combined, they are 
neutralized. Just as an umbrella or sun screen protects 
one from the sun, so gems protect one from the 
influence of the planets. 

In ancient Vedic texts, like the Brihat Samhita, the 
origin and healing powers of various gems are dis¬ 
cussed. Persons may use substitute stones instead of 
the more expensive gems. Red garnet can replace 
ruby; moonstone can replace pearl; jade, peridot, or 
green tourmaline can replace emerald; and yellow 
topaz or citrine can replace yellow sapphire. 






















Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 11: Color and Gem Therapies 


In the Ayurvedic tradition these stones are ance. specific diseases. The chart below shows the 
planetary stones, the doshas, and the diseases used planetary stones, and the diseaes they balance, 
to balance the three doshas and to heal they bal- 


Planet 

Wave 

Length 

Gem 

Wave 

Length 

Sun ( Surya ) 

65,000 

Ruby 

70,000 

Moon 

(Chandra) 

65,000 

Pearl 

70,000 

Mars 

(Mangal) 

85,000 

Red Coral 

65,000 

Mercury 

(Buddha) 

65,000 

Emerald 

75,000 

Jupiter 

(Guru) 

130,000 

Yellow Sapphire 

50,000 

Venus 

(Shukra) 

130,000 

Diamond (Clear Zircon) 

60,000 

Saturn 

(Shani) 

65,000 

Blue Sapphire/Amethyst/Lapis 

79,000 

Rahu 

35,000 

Gomedha (Golden Hessonite 
Garnet) 

70,000 

Ketu 

35,000 

Cat's Eye (Chrysoberyl) 

70,000 


Precautions: The gems have been found to have side 
effects depending upon birth sign and planetary place¬ 
ment. This is especially true of blue sapphire. Differ¬ 
ent astrologers have different criteria to judge 
contraindications. Avoiding gem therapy, unless prop¬ 
erly advised, may be best. 


Jyotish suggests wearing gems, and ingesting 
touch the s kin . Pendants should touch the heart them 
internally (after a long heating process to or throat 
chakras, and rings with different gem-make them 
safe), or as gem tinctures. Stones should be worn on 
various fingers, as the worn as rings and pendants are 
mounted so as to elements dictate. 



















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Planet 

Gem 

Helps 

Heals 

Sun 

Ruby/ 

Red Garnet 

Vayu/Kapha 

heart, spleen, hypertension, infections, fevers, 
bile, hot temper, impatience, brain, heart, acne, 
low energy, poor circulation, edema, eyesight, 
bones, arthritis 

Moon 

Moonstone/ 

Pearl 

Vayu/Pitta 

infertility, kidney, lung, mental disorders 

Mars 

Red Coral 

Pitta 

fevers, inflammations, ulcers, bleeding 
disorders, weak muscles, liver, small intestines, 
vitality, accidents 

Mercury 

Green Gems 

Pitta-mind 

vertigo, giddiness, mental disorders, stuttering, 
memory loss, anxiety, nervous indigestion 

Jupiter 

Yellow 

Gems 

Vayu/Kapha 

weak immune system, tumors, arterial 
circulation, weight, jaundice, liver, abscess, 
pancreas, nerve and gland dysfunction 

Venus 

Diamond/ 
Clear Zircon 

Vayu/Kapha 

immune, reproductive, and urinary systems, 
kidneys, infertility, weak bones, anemia 

Saturn 

Blue 

Sapphire/ 

Amethyst/ 

Lapis 

Vayu/Pitta 

weak bones, nerves, vitality, constipation, 
epilepsy, paralysis, cancer, immune diseases 

Rahu 

Gomedha 

All 

nervousness, indigestion, loss of coordination, 
mental disorders 

Ketu 

Cat's Eye 

All 

poor digestion or circulation, bleeding, weak 
muscles, nervous system, cancer, paralysis, 
immune diseases 


Each finger is related to one of the five elements. 
The pinky is earth, the ring finger is water, the middle 
finger is air, the index finger is ether, and the thumb 
is fire. The planets correspond to this system as well: 
Mercury—earth, the sun or moon—water, Saturn— 
air, Jupiter—ether. No specific planet rules the fire. 
Precious gems are worn as rings in 2-carat (minimum) 
and 5-carat pendants. Substitute stones are worn as 
rings in 4-carat (minimums) and 7-carat pendants. 
Determinations of planetary therapies are made 
differently than in Western Astrology. 


Vedic Origin of Gems 

The Garuda Purana, an ancient Vedic text, 
includes a discussion of the science of gemology. This 
mythologically-based story may have semantic 
parallels in modem scientific terminology, just as the 
seven deities of the sun are analogous to the seven 
colors of the spectrum (red, orange, yellow, green, 
blue, indigo, and violet) in Vedic Astrology. Thus, it 
is hoped that interested readers will seek out the 
parallels between these Vedic descriptions and modem 
science, rather than doubt its authenticity merely 


















Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 11: Color and Gem Therapies 


because of the use of words like “gods” and “demons.” 

Once, a very powerful demon, Vala, caused 
trouble for all the gods in the universe. After much 
hardship the gods developed a plan to capture Vala 
and kill him. Once dead, Vala was cut into pieces. His 
limbs were transformed into the seeds of precious 
gems. All the creatures of the universe mshed to gather 
the gem seeds. In the clamor some of the seeds fell to 
earth, dropping into rivers, oceans, forests, and moun¬ 
tains. There they developed into mother lodes. 

Vala’s blood became ruby seeds and fell over In¬ 
dia, Burma, Afghanistan, Pakistan, Nepal, Tibet, Sri 
Lanka, and ancient Siam. 

His teeth became pearl seeds that spread through¬ 
out the oceans of Sri Lanka, Bengal, Persia, Indone¬ 
sia, and other bodies of water in the southern hemi¬ 
sphere. 

The skin of Vala became yellow sapphire seeds, 
plummeting mainly to the Himalayas. Vala’s finger¬ 
nails became hessonite garnet seeds that fell into lo¬ 
tus ponds of Sri Lanka, India, and Burma. 

His bile became emerald seeds and fell into the 
mountain ranges of modem day South Africa, South 
America, Afghanistan, and Pakistan. Vala’s bones 
became diamond seeds. His war cry became the cat’s- 
eye gem seeds. Blue sapphire seeds were transformed 
from Vala’s eyes. Coral seed was transformed from 
his intestines. Vala’s toenails became red garnet seeds. 
His body fat became jade seeds. Quartz crystal seeds 
were transformed from his semen. Vala’s complex¬ 
ion was transformed into bloodstone coral seeds. 


Gem tinctures are prepared like herb tinctures. 
Gems are soaked for some time in a 50% - 100% 
alcohol solution. Diamonds or sapphires (hard gems) 
are soaked from one full moon to the next full moon 
(one month). Opaque stones—pearls, coral (soft 
stones)— are soaked for shorter time periods or in 
weaker solutions. 

Below is a list of gems, their related doshas, and 
their uses. Special Ayurvedic preparations exist in 
which gems are burnt into ash. This removes their 
harmful effects, enabling them to be ingested. Tradi¬ 
tionally, gems were crushed and/or burnt in long pro¬ 


cesses to make ash. Sometimes they are taken alone, 
sometimes they are mixed with herbs. Gem ash 
(bhasma) is more costly than herbs, but healing is 
quicker. Currently, they are not imported into the 
United States due to the lack of understanding of their 
safety. 


Key to abbreviations: 

V = Vdyu; P = Pitta; K = Kapha. 
‘+ ’ means increases the dosha; 

’ means decreases the dosha 


Ruby VK- P++ 

Uses: Strengthens the heart and will, improves 
digestion, circulation, agni fire, and energy; 
promotes independence, insight, and power, 

Gem of the kings. 

Worn: Usually set in gold and worn on the right- 
hand ring finger. 

Ash : (Manikya bhasma) Actions: Stimulant, 
nervine. 

Uses: Heart tonic for weak heart, nerves, and 
general debility. 

Pearl VP- K+ 

Uses: Gives the body fluid, nourishes tissues and 
nerves, strengthens female reproductive sys¬ 
tem, improves fertility, and calms emotions. 

Worn: Usually set in silver and worn on the left- 
hand ring finger. 

Ash : (Moti bhasma) 

Actions: Tonic, alterative, sedative, nervine, 
antacid. 

Uses: Hyperacidity, ulcers, nose bleeds, cough¬ 
ing blood, liver, kidney, nervous excitability, 
hysteria, general tonic for woman and infants. 

Red Coral Harmonize P V- K+ in excess Uses: 

Strengthens blood, reproductive system, 

gives energy, calms emotions, aphrodisiac, 
improves capacity for work, builds flesh and 

aM/, 




4 # 








The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


muscle—especially for males; gives courage. 

Worn: Set in silver and worn on either ring or index 

finger. 

Ash : (Praval bhasma) 

Actions: Alterative, antacids, tonic. 

Uses: Cough, asthma, swollen glands, hyper¬ 
acidity, impotence, bleeding from the lungs, 
anemia, sexual debility. 

Emerald V= P- K+ 

Uses: Promotes healing, energizes breathing, 
strengthens lungs, increases mental flexibility 
and adaptability (calming agitation), regulates 
nervous system, helps stops nerve pain, improves 
speech and intelligence; cancer, degenerative 
diseases. 

Worn: VK-set in gold; P-set in silver, worn on the 

middle or pinky finger of either hand. Ash: 

(Panna bhasma) 

Actions: Nervine, alterative, tonic. 

Uses: Nervous and general debility, neurasthe¬ 
nia, heart tonic, asthma, ulcers, s ki n diseases, 
fevers, infections, children’s tonic. 

Yellow Sapphire VPK= Y— P+ in excess Uses: 

Best stone for promoting health, increases ojas; 
diabetes, all wasting diseases, convalescence, 
regulates hormones, energy, vitality. 

Worn: Set in gold, and worn on the index finger. 

Ash: None. 


Diamond VP- K+ 

Uses: Strengthens the kidneys and reproductive sys¬ 
tem, enhances ojas, gives beauty, power charm, 
enhances creativity, protects life from diseases. 

Worn: Set in white gold and worn in the middle or 
little finger. 

Ash : (Him bhasma) 

Actions: Tonic, nutritive, aphrodisiac. 

Uses: Gives strength, firmness, protects life, 
increases sexual power and ojas; chronic and 
wasting diseases (i.e., diabetes, TB), preserves 
life in difficult diseases (e.g., cancer, AIDS). 

Substitute: Zir con ash (Vaikrant bhasma). 

Hessonite Garnet (Golden variety-Gomedha) 

VPK= 

Uses: Good balancing stone, calms nerves, quiets 


mind, relieves depression, recommended 
for almost everyone as it is removes illusion 
(maya), and negative astral forces that are due 
to the dark age in which it is believed we live. 

Worn: Set in gold, worn on the middle finger. 

Ash: Not used. 

Cat’s-eye (Chrysoberyl) VK- P+ 

Actions: Nervine, stimulant. 

Uses: Stimulates tejas, promotes psychic and 
spiritual perception, mental disorders, stone 
of seers and astrologers. 

Worn: Set in gold, worn on the middle finger of 
the right hand. 

Ash: Not used. 


Quartz Crystal VP- K+ 

Action: Similar to diamond but much weaker. 

Uses: It is considered a stone for Venus, and being 
cloudy or milky, a stone for the moon also. 

Precautions: It amplifies the existing emotions, 
leaving one open to impressions, so purifying and 
energizing it is used regularly with mantras and 
sadhana (meditation) is necessary. 

Ash: Rock crystal (Sphatika bhasma) 

Actions: Alterative, hemostatic, tonic. 

Uses: Bleeding disorders, anemia, chronic fever, 
jaundice, asthma, constipation, general debility. 


Mineral and Metallic Bhasmas 

Many mineral and metal bhasmas also exist and 
are used for a variety of health disorders. They are 
more powerful than herbs and have a faster healing 
action. Bhasmas need to be obtained from only the 
most reliable pharmacies. If they are improperly burnt 
one can develop severe i lln esses. Currently, the United 
States and a few other countries are not aware of the 
non-toxic healing properties of some of the bhasmas 
such as lead, tin, and mercury. 












Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 11: Color and Gem Therapies 


Herb-increasing Properties 
of Gems & Their Tinctures 

Hot and spicy herbs: Properties increased by using 
ruby tincture, or along with wearing ruby gems or 
substitute stones. 

Tonic and rejuvenative herbs: Properties increased 
with yellow sapphire or yellow topaz tinctures or 
along stones or substitutes. 

Blood cleansers, cool, detox liver, remove tumors : 

Properties increased by taking blue sapphire tincture 
or along with wearing the stone or its substitutes (i.e., 
amethyst). 


Nervines and harmonizing herbs: Properties increased 
by taking emerald tincture or also with wearing the 
stone or its substitutes. 

Stimulants and aphrodisiacs: Properties increased by 
using with red coral tincture or with wearing the stone. 

Emmenagogues and reproductive tonics: Properties 
increased by taking with diamond tincture or by 
wearing a diamond or its substitutes. 

Demulcents and nutritive tonics: Properties increased 
by taking with pearl tincture or by wearing pearl or 
its substitute. 














The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 




Wo^onxaai 57 U-ilLIlA. 







Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 12: External Influences: Lifestyles, Seasons, Exercise 


When one realizes Brahman, 
what is there to realize, 
and who is there to realize it? 

Upanishadic wisdom 


Chapter 12 
External Influences: 

Lifestyles, Seasons, Exercise 


ealth prevention, in holistic terms, means 
balancing one’s whole life. Thus, beyond 
considering one’s physical, mental, and spiri¬ 
tual (inner) health, external situations of lifestyle and 
environment are also examined for their effects on 
health. 

Morning & Evening Routine 

‘Cleanliness is next to Godliness,’ as the saying 
goes. The ancient Ayurvedic texts placed great em¬ 
phasis on the daily cleansing ritual. Below are some 
major suggestions. 

Evacuation of bowels and urine is best done in the 
squatting position as the organs are aligned for the 
easiest release of waste (malas). This position also 
helps dispel gas. 

Water (cool) instead of, or poured on toilet paper, is 
gentler to the anus. Oiling the anus after bathing is 
also healthy; it prevents drying. 

Brushing with astringent, pungent, and bitter roots 
(or twigs made into brushes), twice a day, without 
injuring gums. Flossing is important and herbal tooth 
powders are also beneficial. 

Scraping the root of the tongue with instruments of 
gold, silver, copper, tin, or brass. Curved U-shaped 
metal strips or spoons are used. Scraping removes 
obstructions in respiration. By scraping the whole 
tongue, one releases repressed emotions. Scraping 
the tongue is also done upon waking each morning. 
Gargling with water or oil in the morning after brush¬ 
ing and scraping, improves voice, jaw, increases one’s 
delight in eating; it also prevents a dry throat, cracked 



Eye Wash using cool to lukewarm water improves 
vision and all eye disorders, and refreshes the mind 
(also see Chapter 7). 

Oil Head Abhyahga using brcihml oil (VPK=) or 
sesame oil (Vayu), canola oil (Kapha) [ideally 
warmed], to avoid headaches, gray and falling hairs; 
it improves sense oigans, promotes cheerfulness, and 
a pleasant glow. Sleep becomes sound and one feels 
happier. (Numerous oil abhyahgas are discussed in 
Chapter 7.) 

Oil Ear Abhyahga A drop or two of vegetable 
glycerine, brcihml, or canola oils mbbed into the ear 
holes heals and prevents Vayu ear and hearing 
diseases, stiff back, neck, and jaw. This can be done 
several times a week (see Chapter 7). 

Oil Body Abhyahga anointing the body with the same 
warmed oils used for the head, the body becomes 
firm, smooth-skinned, free from Vayu, and tolerant 
of exertions and exercise. It is suggested especially 
to balance the sense of touch (Vayu), as discussed in 
Chapter 16. Adding medicated oils such as 
mahanarayan and dashmul to the base oil further 
nurtures tissues, and draws toxins out of the body. If 
digestion becomes sluggish due to oil application, 
the number of oil abhyahgas and the amount of oil 
used are reduced. 

A Vayu abhyahga includes the feet, lower back, 
colon area, neck, shoulders, and head. 

A Pitta abhyahga includes the chest, the area of 
the back behind the heart, and head. 

Kapha abhyahga covers the lower abdomen, chest, 
throat, and sinuses. 

Foot abhyahga removes coarseness, stiffness, 




lips, and loose teeth (also see Chapter 19). 














The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


roughness, fatigue, numbness, sciatica, vein and 
ligament constriction, cracks; it also improves vision 
and sleep. Since all the organs of the body have nerves 
extending to the feet, the entire body is exercised 
through foot abhyanga. 

Manna abhxangas Oil abyahgas described in Chapter 
7 produce positive effects that heal and keep persons 
balanced. Heaviness, itching, dirt, anorexia, sweat, 
and odor are removed. 

Bathing (or a shower) is purifying, an aphrodisiac, 
promotes life, removes fatigue, sweat, and dirt; 
rejuvenates, promotes ojas. Cleaning feet and 
excretory orifices daily promotes intelligence, purity, 
longevity, destroys inauspiciousness and dirt. Oil 
applied to the skin nourishes the tissue layers and 
draws toxins to the skin. Bathing after abhyanga 
removes these toxins, keeping the skin clean and 
healthy. 

Clean clothes enhance one’s charm, fame, and life 
span. They remove inauspiciousness and give 
pleasure, thus making it enjoyable to be around others. 
Aroma Therapy oils, incense, scented soap, and 
flowers promote longevity, charm, nourishment, 
strength. They also enhance pleasing manners and 
destroy inauspiciousness (see Chapter 8). 

Betel leaves chewed with certain fruits and cardamom 
aid in clarity and keep the mouth fresh. 

Gem Therapy, colors, and ornaments promote wealth, 
auspiciousness, longevity, prosperity, happiness, 
charm, ojas, and destroy potential calamities in one’s 
life (see Chapter 11). 

Cutting hair, nails, beard/mustache is nutritive, life- 
promoting; beautifies and cleans. 

An umbrella alleviates natural calamities, provides 
strength, protection, and guards one against the sun, 
wind, dust, and rains. 

Carrying a stick gives support, strength, and longevity. 
It protects against enemies and destroys fears. 

4:00 a.m. The prana (vital air-force) is said to be 
purest at this time of day. Thus, it is good for a walk 
and for sadhana (meditation). 

Sunrise is a good time to have the eyes in the direction 
of the first rays of sunlight (though not looking directly 
at the sun). This exercise improves one’s vision and 
vitality. 

Sunlight is important to receive daily, if possible. 


Taking in sunlight in the winter is more difficult 
because it is colder and there is less sunlight. During 
summer the sunlight is best in the early morning or 
late evening, not in the intense heat between 11:00 
a.m. and 2:00 p.m., when the sun is at its zenith and 
its rays are strongest. Sunlight is the only source of 
vitamin D4 and Ds. 

Find a livelihood that is not contradictory to one’s 
dhanna (God-given talents). Be civic-minded and 
care for the body: thus, happiness is brought about. 
Wash hands before and after meals: cleanliness is next 
to Godliness. 

Practicing Sadhana (meditation) according to the 
instructions of one’s Guru (spiritual teacher). Snuff 
daily use for Vayu, Kapha and Vayu/Kapha doshas 
(see Chapter 7). 

Seasonal Diet 

It is recommended one’s eating habits should de¬ 
pend primarily on one’s dosha, with a secondary con¬ 
sideration of the season. Ayurveda discerns six sea¬ 
sons in a year. The Ashtanga Hridayam also men¬ 
tions transition periods between these seasons. De¬ 
pending upon the country and geographical location 
one fives in, the seasonal experiences may vary. 

The first three seasons are considered weakening 
because the sun takes away one’s strength during the 
Northern Solstice. The sun and wind create a cool¬ 
ing, drying, and heating influence by removing the 
(nurturing) cool qualities of the earth, while the bit¬ 
ter, astringent, and pungent qualities develop. Thus, 
the tastes (qualities of the elements) of sharpness, 
dryness, and heat (Pitta or agni) gain predominance 
during this half of the year. It is the sun that bums up 
the soma (spiritual nectar) that weakens people. The 
tastes of bitter, astringent, and pungent are depleting 
in nature, so it is advised to eat foods having sweet, 
sour, and salty tastes to counteract the depleting ef¬ 
fect. 

























Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 12: External Influences: Lifestyles, Seasons, Exercise 


Cool - Dewy ( Shishira ) 

Mid-Jann - Mid-March 

Spring ( Vasant ) 

Mid-March - Mid-May 

Summer (Grishina) 

Mid-May - Mid-July 

Rainy ( Varshd) 

Mid-July - Mid-Sept. 

Autumn (Sharat) 

Mid-Sept. - Mid-Nov. 

Winter ( Hemanta ) 

Mid-Nov. - Mid-Jan. 


[Seasonal dates will vary according to country and 
geographical region. While the rainy season may not be literally 
experienced in some countries like the U.S., there may be subtler 
solar rays and gravitational influences that will still be 
applicable. Thus, some practitioners find the six seasons 
applicable even in countries outside of India.] 


In the chart above the latter three seasons are con¬ 
sidered a strength-giving time. The moon becomes 
more powerful, causing the sun to transfer his strength 
to the lunar orb. Heat is relieved by the moist and 
cool elements. In this Southern Solstice, where the 
moon predominates, the sour element is active dur¬ 
ing the rainy Varshd season; salt prevails in autumn 
and the sweet element grows in winter. These tastes 
gradually tone, or give strength to, humans. During 
Varsha-He-manta (Rainy through Winter) the winds 
die down and the moon’s cool rays produce soma, or 
nectar, that nourishes the spiritual energies of the 
people (and animals and nature). In these seasons, it 
is advised to eat foods of pungent, bitter, and astrin¬ 
gent tastes to counterbalance the predominating tastes 
due to environmental effects. Traditional paiicha 
karma is not indicated at this time, but Kerallya 
paiicha karma is very helpful, especially for Vayu 
closhas (see chart—page 40.) 

Winter (Vayu season) one avoids Vayu-increasing, 
light foods, wind, cold drinks, and eats more steamed 
meals and dresses warmly. The digestive fire is much 
higher during this season, making heavier foods more 
easily digestible. If inadequate amounts of food are 
eaten, the agni lire will bum up the body’s plasma 
(rasa), vitiating Vayu. Cane sugar, rice, oils, hot wa¬ 
ter, and milk products promote longevity, when taken 
during this season. Raw honey, sour, and salty tastes 
are also suggested. Oil massage and heat (i.e., sauna, 
steam room etc.) are also suggested. During this sea- 


son, physical expressions of love between married 
couples is healthy, according to Ayurveda. One’s 
house is to be kept warm; drafts should be avoided. 

Cool/Dewy (Late Winter - follow a program similar 
to Winter, only more intensely) The house needs to 
be wind-proof and amply heated. Sweet, sour, and 
salty foods are eaten, while pungent, bitter, astringent, 
light, cold, and Vayu-increasing foods and drinks are 
avoided. Kapha accumulates in this season due to 
the cold and dampness of wind, clouds, and rain. This 
is the time that Pitta is balanced. This is the start of 
the Northern Solstice, whose winds begin to deplete 
human strength. 

Spring is when the accumulated Kapha from the 
previous two seasons begins to melt or liquefy (i.e., 
Kapha becomes excessed), due to the gradual 
warming of the sun. This creates many Kapha 
diseases. Thus, evacuative measures like emesis are 
used and pungent tastes are eatem, while heavy, sour, 
fatty, and sweet diet, and day naps are avoided because 
they increase Kapha. Exercise, oil massage, aroma 
therapy, smoking herbs, gargling, eye-washing and 
warm-water bathing are all suggested. Sandalwood 
paste is applied to body, and more barley (Pitta- and 
Kapha-reducing) and wheat (Vayu and Pitta) products 
are eaten. Springtime is the season for amour (but 
physical relations are contraindicate and reserved for 
the winter season). 

Summer is a hot and dry season (Kapha is normal¬ 
ized and Vayu accumulates due to the dry or dehy¬ 
drating effect of the heat). Thus, one eats more raw 
and lightly steamed vegetables, drinks cool juices, 
has more sweet things, ghee, milk, and rice. Sour, 






















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


salted, pungent, and hot foods are avoided. It is sug¬ 
gested that there be little or no exercise at this time. 
One takes naps in a cool room during the day and 
sleeps in a well-ventilated room or on the roof (cooled 
by moon rays) by night. Sandalwood paste is also 
suggested for the body. Pearls and other cooling gems 
are suggested (depending on astrological indications). 
Fans, cool water, spending time in forests, and ab¬ 
staining from sexual intercourse are suggested. 


Mid-Jan. - Mid-July 

eat more sweet, sour, 
and salty tastes 

Mid-July - Mid-Jan. 

eat more pungent, 
bitter, and astringent 
tastes 


Rainy The agni fire, already weakened from the 
dryness produced by the summer, is further 
diminished in the rainy season. During this season, 
the clouds are full of water; it is cold, windy, and in 
some places, snowy. These conditions continue to 
aggravate all three doshas. The water becomes muddy 
from the runoff caused by the rain, the warm earth 
creates sourness of water, while the agni digestive 
fire, as already mentioned, becomes even weaker. Pitta 
begins to accumulate due to weakened digestion and 
increased acidity in the atmospheric water. Vayu, 
which had begun to accumulate in the dry or 
dehydrating summer heat, becomes aggravated due 
to weak digestion, acidic atmospheric conditions, and 
gas issuing from the earth. Kapha also becomes 
vitiated due to the acidity of the water. 

Thus, in this season the three doshas start vitiat¬ 
ing each other, causing many diseases of all three 
dosluis. This is a troubling time for the mind and body, 
and all the doshas must be monitored very carefully. 
It is the transition season from the northern solstice 
(depleting), to southern solstice (strengthening). De¬ 
pending upon the weather from day to day, one has 
to adjust their diet and lifestyle. Overall, one avoids 
cold drinks, day naps, dew, river water, exercise, sun, 
and intercourse. Foods and drinks are mixed with 
honey. On windy, cool, and rainy days sour, salty. 


and fatty foods are taken to pacify Vayu. Also one 
takes wheat, rice, oils, soups, cooled Vayu-reducing 
teas, oil massage, aroma therapy, baths, light clean 
clothes. A humidifier is used, if needed. Pahcha 
karma, purification therapies (see Chapter 7) are sug¬ 
gested as well (medicated emesis, purgation, enemas, 
and nasal oil therapy). Grain soups, medicated grape 
wines, or fermented foods are recommended. 


Autumn The aggravated Pitta from the rainy season 
worsens as a result of the sudden warmth of the sun’s 
rays. (In America, the equivalent is perhaps Indian 
summer— the transition between summer and fall.) 
Thus, Pitta reduction therapy is suggested. Medicated 
ghee (clarified butter with Pitta-reducing herbs), 
water, bitter, astringent, and sweet-tasting foods, 
easily digestible foods should be eaten, leaving room 
in the stomach (i.e., do not eat until satiated). 
Purgation therapy is also recommended. Fifestyle 
indictions include sitting outside the house (on 
porches or balconies) in the evenings, wearing 
sandalwood oil or powder, drinking pearl water or 
wearing pearls, and moonlight bathing. It is advisable 
to avoid snow, ingesting alkalines, heavy meals, sour 
foods, excess or warm oils, fatty foods, exposure to 
the sun, alcohol or cigarettes, daytime naps, and 
eastern breezes. 


Generally, persons should have a little of each of 
the six tastes (i.e., sweet, sour, salty, pungent, bitter, 
astringent) each day. However, during each month in 
which any of the tastes are environmentally 
predominant, one should reduce or avoid that taste to 
maintain balance. Since that taste is already excessed, 
consuming foods of that taste will only cause more 
imbalance. So each person must determine what 
constitutes a comfortable amount of each taste. 













Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 12: External Influences: Lifestyles, Seasons, Exercise 


Dosha 

Slight Increase 

Reduce Dosha 

Vayu 

Mid-May - 
Mid-July 

Mid-July - 
Mid-August 

Pitta 

Mid-July - 
Mid-Sept. 

Mid-Sept. - 
Mid-Nov. 

Kapha 

Mid-Sept. - 
Mid-Nov. 

Mid-Dec. - 
Mid-Jan. 


Transitional Periods are the seven days at the end 
and beginning of each season. Ayurveda advises 
slowly discontinuing the foods and lifestyle of the 
preceding season, and gradually adopting those 
suggested for the coming season. It is said that 
diseases are created by suddenly ending one habit, 
and just as suddenly beginning another. (Ashtanga 
Hridayam- Sutra. Ch. 3. verses 58-591/2). 

Exercise (Vyayama) 

Another important lifestyle routine is exercise. It 
is a very important healing therapy for a balanced 
state of health. Exercise tones and balances all seven 
tissues (dhatus) and channels (srotas), improves blood 
circulation, muscle strength and tone, weight con¬ 
trol, and the respiratory and digestive systems. Fur¬ 
thermore, it creates a harmonious state of mind. There 
are three levels of exercise: passive (e.g., massage), 
active (e.g., walking, skiing), and energy-balancing 
(e.g., yoga, Tai Chi). Yet, to prevent insufficient or 
excessive exercise, Ayurveda stresses an individual 
approach to exercise for each dosha . 

In the 1980’s there was a popular saying, “no pain, 
no gain.” However, this is only tme for Kapha doshas. 
For Vayu and Pitta constitutions, the saying is, “No 
pain, no pain.” That is, exercise until one begins to 
perspire, then stop. Excess exercise will hurt and de¬ 
hydrate Vayu doshas, and it will overheat Pitta doshas. 
On the other hand, Kapha persons need a very active 
routine and are strongly advised to exercise a little 
past the point of fatigue. This improves mental alert¬ 
ness, digestion, and weight control. Professional and 


semi-professional athletes, and those who are on a 
program to build up their endurance, will need to 
perspire and feel some fatigue. These guidelines 
should always kept in mind and adapted as needed. 

Vayu Doshas: Though they prefer fast, exciting ac¬ 
tivities that will further raise their air element, they 
do better with slower, more grounding exercise. Ac¬ 
tive sports include walking (the best exercise), jump¬ 
ing on a trampoline, swimming, dancing, and cross¬ 
country skiing. To prevent drying out, it is best that 
Vayu doshas oil their bodies as a warm-up. Yoga or 
stretching is also advised before and after exercising. 
Drinking Vayu-reducing tea before exercise also pre¬ 
vents dehydration. Vayu doshas tend to have joint 
and arthritic problems, so oil massage, stretching, and 
exercises that neither stress nor have high impact on 
the joints are useful. Varying exercises (cross-train¬ 
ing) helps keep the Vayu mind satisfied. Afterwards, 
eating a snack will restore energy. Yoga or stretching 
is suggested to remove stiffness. Five minutes in a 
steam bath or hot tub helps relax and offer moist, 
penetrating heat (but always keep the head out of the 
heat—see Chapter 7 on pahcha karma). 


Dosha 

Best Exercises 

Vayu 

walking (the best exercise), 
trampolining, swimming, dancing, 
cross-country skiing. 

Pitta 

walking (best exercise), down-hill 
skiing, water sports, team sports, 
hiking 

Kapha 

walking (best - especially after meals), 
active sports (e.g. basketball), jogging, 
water sports 


Pitta Doshas: Have strong, athletic bodies. They love 
a challenge and competition, but need to maintain a 
sense of fun during their workout. Team sports curb 
their tendency towards aggression and overly intense 
competitiveness, and develop their organization and 




















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


leadership skills. Oil massage and yoga or stretching 
is advised before a workout. After exercising, yoga 
and relaxation are important. A cup of cooled herbal 
tea helps one to cool down. Enjoying a steam bath 
for 5 to 10 minutes is a good way to unwind (keeping 
the head out of the heat—see Chapter 7). 

Kapha Doshas: Tend towards inactivity, yet need to 
exercise the most. They have the strongest constitution 
and require a strong workout, exercising a little past 
the point of fatigue. This improves their digestion, 
circulation, lymphatic system, controls weight and 
cellulite, and develops mental alertness. Having a dog 
as a pet takes advantage of their devoted nature to get 
Kapha doshas up and out on a walk. Jogging is 
excellent for the Kapha person (but not for Vayu and 
Pitta doshas). They also do well in a structured 
exercise class. 

Usually, persons are advised to breathe evenly 


during exercise to strengthen the lungs and digestive 
system; however, if there are respiratory, digestive, 
or inflammatory disorders, a workout is not advised. 

Herbs 

While many people take vitamins to enhance 
athletic performance, Ayurveda suggests that they 
may be difficult to digest and absorb. Herbs offer a 
more fundamental form of nutrition in their holistic 
or synergized form, which mother nature created— 
unlike vitamins, which may cause a potential for 
imbalance. Further, herbs are easily digested, 
assimilated, and work quickly. It is useful for the Vayu 
dosha athlete to drink some herbal tea or fruit juice 
before and after exercising to prevent dehydration. 

The chart below lists herbs that athletes are ad¬ 
vised to take between exercise sessions. They can be 
taken internally and applied externally as pastes. 


Herb 

Sports Benefit 

Ashwagandha 

V- P+ K+ in 

excess 

builds muscles and tissues, strengthens the mind and immune 
systems; improves mind/body coordination and concentration; 
counters exhaustion and graying 

Brahmi 

VPK= 

the best brain tonic; improves memory, concentration, 
intelligence and meditation; rejuvenates brain cells and nerves, 
the adrenals and immune system; purifies the blood skin and 
liver. When used with fo-ti it reverses the aging process 

Chyvan Prash 

VPK= 

improves concentration and memory; an anti-oxidant; more 
vitamin C than oranges 

Comfrey 

VP- K+ 

promotes tissue growth, heals sprains, wounds, and fractures 

Fo-Ti 

VP- K+ 

strengthens muscles, tendons, ligaments, and bones; rebuilds 
tissues, strengthens liver, kidneys, and the nervous system 

Manjishthd 

PK- V+ ** 

heals damaged tissues and broken bones; cleanses and regulates 
liver, spleen, and kidney; the best blood purifier 

Turmeric 

VPK= 

stretches ligaments, heals strains, sprains, and bruises; one of 
the best antioxidants. Take 1 hour before exercise 















Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 13: Ayurvedic Psychology, Ethics, and Spiritual Counseling 


In all of life’s activities, one should adopt 
the middle course; avoid extremes. 

Ashtanga Hridayam: Su. Ch. 2; ver. 30 


Chapter 13 

Ayurvedic Psychology, Ethics 
and Spiritual Counseling 


hen reading the original Ayurvedic texts 
(i.e., Charak Samhitd, Sushrut Samhitd, 
Ashthdhga Hridayam), one sees that 
Ayurveda is truly a complete, or holistic, science. In 
these ancient writings, insights into the science of 
mind and body were seen as interdependent, and a 
complete system of psychological healing was laid 
out. 

In Chapter 12, we discussed the role of the envi¬ 
ronment as one of several factors in creating imbal¬ 
ances. This also includes the external mental or psy¬ 
chological environment. Practically speaking, when 
a person cannot find any internal or physical causes 
for an illness, Ayurveda suggests looking to other 
factors (both mental and physical): for example, 
lifestyle plays a vital role in a balanced or healthy 
life. Environmental changes can balance a person as 
much as herbs, aromas, or other factors. Ayurveda 
emphasizes the natural restoration and development 
of harmony and health, in the home and surround¬ 
ings. People are advised to do the following: 

V Take in positive impressions. 

V Release negative emotions (i.e., do not suppress 
them). 

V Maintain and develop positive self-worth and self¬ 
esteem. 

V Remember that the goal of life is Divine God 
Home: 

V Insure surroundings of beauty and harmony. 

V Gain rest and happiness. 

V Use full-spectrum light bulbs in the winter if 
suffering from depression. 


V Make your dwelling, or at least some part of 
it, into a temple of sacred healing. 

V Prepare an altar with photos of saints, sages, dei¬ 
ties, sacred objects, statures, gems, yantras, incense, 
flowers, belts, and the like (according to your faith). 
When you use this space only for meditation and 
chanting, it will grow in the energy of spiritual peace. 

Nature : 

V Daily walks renew, revive, and refresh. 

V Take hik es and nature walks; go camping. 

V Visiting oceans, streams, waterfalls, and other natu¬ 
ral bodies of water. 

V Visit public gardens, or till and plant your own 
garden (with waterfall and pond if possible). 

V Get adequate sun and fresh air daily. 

Doshas and the Environment 

Vavu: Gains rest, relaxation, stability, peace and 
security from the environment. 

Pitta: Needs relaxation, recreation, amusement, 
beauty, affection, and delight. 

Kapha: Needs exercise, work, stimulation, 
motivation, exertion. 

Love and Emotions 

Consciousness, or moksha. Wlien a person is cen¬ 
tered within themselves, there is a feeling that Mother 
Nature will provide all of one’s essential needs, food, 
shelter, peace, contentment, grace, and Divinity. This 
faith in her will constantly grow. Faith emanates from 
within the individual, is automatically experienced, 














The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


and is shared with others. 

Faith or Divine love can be cultivated through 
sadhana (meditation), proper diet, aromas, music, 
massage, yoga, and other therapies. These spiritual 
and healing methods allow persons to actively take 
positive control of their lives, clear their emotions, 
and enlarge their inner Divinity. These modalities help 
persons of different doshas in specific ways: 

Vavu: Releases fear and anxiety, and develops 
peace, faith, and courage. 

Pitta: Releases anger, resentment, impatience, and 
develops love, compassion, and forgiveness. 

Kapha: Releases greed, attachment, clinging, 
lethargy, and develops clarity and detachment from 
these emotions. 


Developing Self-Worth 

In the book Yoga Vani; Instructions for the 
Attainment of Siddhayoga, Vedic advice is offered for 
developing one’s self-esteem. People are advised to 
try the following: 

Test truth on the touchstone of their own heart. 
3 Be aware that doubt can come even disguised as a 
friend, undermining one’s desires and efforts for 
health and Self-Realization. 

3 Reali z e that doubt is l ik e a ghost trying to scare 
one from their scidhana and spiritual life. 

This Vedic advice provides methods to overcome 
doubts. A person learns what is true through a 
threefold process: 

1) What one reads in the scriptures. 

2) What one’s Guru or teacher tells them. 

3) What one experiences for themselves. 

Only when all three situations come together will 
one have true knowledge. So one always makes sure 
they experience things for themselves before believing 
anyone or anything (i.e., does not follow blindly). 

3 Have faith in one’s Guru or and their meditation 
instructions. 

3 The doubting or low self-esteem mind becomes 


peaceful through sadhana and other Ayurvedic prac¬ 
tices. A far-flying kite will easily come to hand when 
the string is wound around the stick. So too, the 
troubled mind comes under control through repeated 
repetitions (i.e., revolutions) of the mantra. 

3 Practicing sadhana daily forces the mind to work 
tirelessly, moving up and down the sushumnd (the 
spiritual tube in the spine) until the mind tires and 
thoughts leave of their own accord. Then, the mind 
automatically becomes silent. 

As one begins to feel and see this growing inner 
Divinity extend to others and the outer world, their 
sense of self-worth is strengthened. Thus, people are 
advised to notice and release negative attitudes and 
wishes (e.g., “I’d rather be sick than confront this 
issue, I’m dumb and worthless, Nothing good ever 
happens to me.”) 

By contemplating, “Who am I?”, one begins to 
feel inner Divine grace, thus instantly releasing 
negative thoughts, self-created or accepted from 
others. By not limiting oneself, one is able to accept 
their mistakes as a challenge—to alter the situation, 
and grow. Each mental dosha has a specific exercise 
or focus to achieve balance: 

Vavu: Has to give up the negative self-idea that 
they are weak, afraid, isolated, agitated, or disturbed. 

Pitta: Has to reduce the need to overachieve and 
take power (it makes the person appear domineering 
and others look worse). 

Kapha: Has to practice atonement and give up the 
idea that they are defined by what they own, their 
family, culture, or job. They have to challenge a false 
sense of contentment. 


Inner and Outer Worlds 

As one releases negative ideas they hold about 
themselves and their life, they find that the outer world 
reflects how they feel within. People, animals, and 
nature are all a part of the same web of life; touch 
one area of the web and the whole web is affected. 
To help oneself, one must help others. As the 
realization of the interconnectedness or 










Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 13: Ayurvedic Psychology, Ethics, and Spiritual Counseling 


unboundedness of one’s inner Divinity grows, the 
view of separateness between the inner and outer 
world diminishes. One begins to see that everyone 
and everything is a part of the same Divine essence. 
Conversely, when things are seen as separate from 
the Self, one longs for that which is believed to be 
other than the Self. This longing causes grief or 
suffering. However, as Self-Realization grows and 
one begins to see all things (i.e., themselves and 
others) as a part of the same Divine essence, then 
longing, grief, and suffering diminish. One begins to 
feel content because nothing is separate from 
themselves. Further, since the Self and others are seen 
as Divine, then the feelings of Divinity (i.e., eternal 
grace and bliss) replace the previously felt negative 
emotions and thoughts. 

Another important way to develop this holy 
experience is by following one’s dharma (one’s life 
path or purpose; using one’s innate or God-given 
talents). Working in a career one loves is another 
definition of following one’s dharma. When persons 
work at something they love, it ceases to feel l ik e 
work. When one uses their God-given talent, it creates 
a stronger connection between themselves and the 
Divine. Persons feel they are doing something 
meaningful and useful; life feels more purposeful. 

Following one’s dharma is not only uplifting for 
the individual, but by definition, is also beneficial for 
others. Thus, each dosha begins to find a more positive 
social outlook. 

Vavu: The idea that the world is a harsh, 
unsupportive, clashing, chaotic, and unadjustable is 
reversed. 

Pitta: Their idea that the world is a place to gain 
power and recognition is changed to a more 
harmonious and integrated view. 

Kapha: A sense of greed and their need for outer 
security, clinging, and accumulation of material things 
is reversed. 



Ayurveda and Counseling 

The ancient Ayurvedic texts were replete with 
information on how to live a healthy balanced life: 

V Fifestyle considerations based on physical 
constitution. 

V Fifestyle considerations based on mental or 
emotional constitution. 

V Psychological insights discuss personal, 
spiritual, career, relationship, and environmental 
issues. 

V Maintenance, prevention, and longevity. 

Charak Samhita says that the practitioner who has 
even a basic knowledge of Ayurveda and practices 
out of love and caring for others will be a better 
practitioner than one who knows everything about 
the topic, yet is more concerned with fame and 
fortune. In short, to be completely effective, the 
essence of the practitioner must be able to touch the 
Soul of the client. 


Practitioner/Client Exchange 

The original Ayurvedic texts clearly state that 
counseling involves tact, diplomacy, and positivity 
on the part of the practitioner. Respect for the client 
is paramount. Warmth, concern, and carefully 
listening to the client is better than having excess 
knowledge and s ki ll while maintaining an 
impersonal or uncaring attitude. (Conversely, these 
ancient scriptures advise that the client also be 
respectful of the practitioner.) 

Practitioners are advised not to become too 
intimate with clients (i.e., they should maintain a 
professional relationship), or else clients may begin 
to view the practitioner as a friend. Then, advice is 
only casually followed. A fine line exists between 
being sensitive and being casual or intimate. 

Respect for the Divine within clients is urged 
because it allows them to listen to their own intuition 
and arrive at their own choices. As clients recognize 
the value and ability of their intuition, they find an 
increase in their own self-worth. Thus, it is important 
that clients understand the scope and potential that 








The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Ayurveda offers. In this way clients have more faith 
in the process and can more easily follow the 
Ayurvedic way. Clients must also feel their personal 
and spiritual life will be respected, knowing that 
consultations will be kept confidential. 


Dosha Personalities 

The Charak Samhita notes that each dosha has a 
different personality; therefore, each dosha requires 
a unique behavioral approach. 

Vayu: They are more fearful, and appear nervous, 
upset, or distracted. These doshas may feel hesitant, 
insecure, fidgety, unsettled, or doubtful about 
themselves or the therapy. Conversely, they may be 
overly enthusiastic and excited, expecting too much 
with no real motivation behind it. They tend to be 
ungrounded and hard to deal with (i.e., they need to 
have an ‘into’ body experience). These people may 
feel negative and worried about themselves and their 
condition, imagining things are worse than they really 
are (i.e., hypochondria). 

Therapy: The practitioner attempts to get them to 
be more realistic about their situation and how to 
correct it; they need to bring them down to earth. They 
need to be treated delicately, like flowers. Vayu 
doshas responsibly start their programs, then begin 
to slack off after a while. 


Pitta: They think they know who they are and 
what they are doing. Probably, they will tell the 
practitioner what they should do for them. These 
people will analyze themselves and try to take over 
the consultation. They may have a critical, aggressive, 
or quarrelsome nature, asking for credentials or 
questioning the reliability of Ayurveda itself. Because 
they enjoy authority status and hierarchy, the 
practitioner needs to respond simply and objectively. 
This dosha may expect the practitioner to heal them. 
They may judge the practitioner’s qualifications or 
want the practitioner to tell them how they will be 
healed. However, the practitioner is advised not to be 

& 


dragged into such game-playing. In short, the more 
practitioners try to justify themselves, the more the 
Pitta dosha will doubt them. If the client is not happy 
with the credentials, then it is just as well; because 
with this client’s frame of mind, the therapy could 
not work. 

Therapy: First, the practitioner is advised to remain 
objective and rational, discussing the critical nature 
of the individual so they can learn to understand it as 
a cause of their imbalances. This process of 
awakening one’s abilities to discriminate enables the 
client to control their fives as opposed to their trying 
to control life; they can change from having a critical 
nature to a discriminating disposition. Pitta doshas 
need to be treated in a friendly manner. These 
constitutions are cooled (balanced) by calm, pleasant 
circumstances and behavior. Only then will they feel 
the practitioner is on their side. This dosha needs to 
feel they are seen in an authoritative light. When Pitta 
doshas understand what is entailed in self-responsible 
healing, they are very good at applying and following 
the therapies. However they must be cautioned not to 
become fanatical in the application of therapy; to 
avoid burnout, the practitioner should urge 
moderation. If the therapy does not go well, however, 
they are apt to become angry and critical. It is best 
for practitioners not to promise too much and to show 
that healing is the responsibility of the client. 

Kapha: These persons need to be motivated, 
stimulated, or shocked into getting well. They are 
often lethargic, slow to act, or lazy; and find it hard to 
implement things. If left to themselves they will 
remain inert. They do not need comfort; although, 
they may seek it. Sentimentality is one cause of their 
health imbalances. 

Therapy: Kapha doshas do not require much 
explanation; they need an extra a push. They need to 
be warned in order to make them respond and work 
on becoming healthy. This dosha requires time and 
patience to implement information. They are more 
responsive to love and personal care, along with an 
insistence and firmness regarding the fundamentals 
of self-healing. If they slip back into their old habits, 










Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 13: Ayurvedic Psychology, Ethics, and Spiritual Counseling 


they return to their self-indulgent behavior. Thus, they 
may need more frequent visits and more interchange 
to stimulate them to get started. Once they start, they 
do well, with only an occasional need for motivation. 


Vayu/Pitta: This dosha moves back and forth 
between fear to anger. They may only be looking for 
someone to dump their negative problems on. Usually 
their immune systems and energy levels are weak, 
and find it hard to undergo questioning or constmctive 
criticism. Their fears and angers will often be 
suppressed. 

Therapy: They need much nurturing, patience, 
consideration, and tact. 

Pitta/Kapha: This dual dosha is both energetic 
and stable; they are healthy and possess a strong 
immune system. Usually content, they approach 
holistic health for enhancement and improvement of 
energy. They lack the adaptability and flexibility of 
Vayu energies. This dosha prefers to dominate or 
control and to be possessive and conservative. 


Client’s Attitude 

First, the practitioner is urged to judge the sin¬ 
cerity of the client. Some people do not really want 
to be well, as they equate their lives with their ill¬ 
nesses. In this case, no one can help them heal. It is 
usually because one wants to be sick that they get 
sick. Being ill draws attention to themselves. The 
practitioner decides if a client wants help or merely 
attention. 

The first questions addressed to the client are, “Do 
you want to be well? Do you have anything to gain 
by staying sick? Is your illness an escape? Will you 
spend the time needed to become well? Do you want 
to be healed or is this just a temporary amusement? 
Are you going to take responsibility for your health 
and heal yourself? Do you expect someone else to 
heal you?” The practitioner awakens the client’s in¬ 
telligence and waits to hear them make a commit¬ 
ment to heal themselves. 


Yama and Niyama Ethical 

Therapy: They need movement, activity, creativity, Codes of Conduct 
and new challenges. 


Vayu/Kapha: These persons lack fire, energy, 
motivation, passion, and enthusiasm. They are 
generally weak, passive, dependent, and 
hypersensitive. They agree to everything they are told 
to do, but do not have the energy to carry through. 
Emotionally and mentally, they are nervous or easily 
disturbed. They can be chameleon-like in their 
personality, appearing as others want them to be. 



Good deeds done for 
reward bring heaven. 

Good deeds done 
without desire bring 
Liberation. 

Upanishadic Wisdom 


Even the insects and ants should be treated with 
Therapy: Delicate and sensitive questions are advised. compassion and kindness, just as one's own self. 
These dual doshas respond to warmth and firmness, Ashtanga Hridayam: Su: Ch. 2; ver. 23 

but it is hard to tell how well they are following the 
therapy. The practitioner is advised to see through 

them, helping them to become clearer and more prac- To develop health and Self-Realization, sadhana 

and Ayurvedic therapies are suggested. Further 
developments in spirituality and healing are gained 
by following the rules of virtuous behavior. 














The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Yama 

1. Ahimsa —not harming, not causing trouble to 
people, animals or the environment, or not feeling 
envy. One’s job must be considered (i.e., this rule 
doesn’t apply if one has a job that may require killing, 
lik e fishing or being a soldier. B ut even for the soldier, 
killing is to be only in self-defense or to protect the 
lives of the oppressed). Those whose job doesn’t 
involve killing are advised not to kill. 

2. Truth or saying what one means. Sincere words 
are meant to clarify one’s ideas. 

3. Non-Stealing —Not coveting other people’s 
possessions; in thought, word, or action. 

4. Brahmacharya —avoiding coition in thought, 
word, and action is applied to single persons. 
Married couples also have a form of brahmacharya 
as discussed in the shastras. 

5. Aparigraha, or non-acceptance—to cease from 
wanting or chasing after material wealth or fame 
because it keeps one’s mind attached or bound (i.e., 
not free or at peace). 

Nivama 

1. Purity (external) means pure food and 
clea nl iness. (Internal) means a pure or sattwic mind 
attained through spiritual practices. 

2. Contentedness with what is obtained 
through luck or the Grace of God. 

3. Tapas, or rigor. Originally, tapas referred to being 
able to bear extremes of heat and cold, hunger, and 
thirst, etc. Today, many gurus say this sort of tapas is 
no longer needed. However, rigor may be seen in 
terms of personality. If a person offers excessive praise 
(warmth) or treats one in a very cold manner, persons 
are advised to ignore both and maintain their 
concentration on their inner Divine Self-Worth and 
the growth of their Self-Realization. 

Wisdom sacrifice (spiritual inquiry from 
realized persons and meditation) is far 
superior to material sacrifice (austerities). 

Bhagavad Gita Ch 4 ver 25-34 

Chapter 17 of the Bhagavad Gita defines austeri¬ 
ties as a threefold process involving the body, speech, 
and mind. 

Body: Worship of God, holy persons, gurus, and 


the wise; act with purity, simplicity, continence, and 
non-injury. 

Speech: That which doesn’t cause harm or pain to 
others, is true, pleasant, and beneficial; and regular 
scriptural study. 

Mind: Cheerfulness, kindness, silence, self- 
control, and purity of heart. 

4. Study of Scriptures. Reading scriptures such 
as Bhagavad Gita, Yoga Vasishta, and Upanishads 
is beneficial for developing a spiritual understanding 
or framework. Practicing sadhana, as instructed by 
one’s guru, is actually the deepest level of study 
because it is learned through direct experience within 
oneself. 

5. Thinking of God as the Be-all and End-all. 
Credit all actions to the Supreme Soul. This helps 
eliminate the desire for the consequence of action, 
(e.g., I am not the doer, I am only the instrument. 
God is the doer) [of course this is not meant to be 
used as an excuse for living irresponsibly]. Thus, one 
becomes less attached to the material world and more 
devoted to the Divine Grace. 


Faith 

Faith develops Self-Worth. The highest form of 
Self-Worth is Self-Realization: seeing that the Self is 
Divine. It is an essential tool that keeps the mind from 
developing intellectual error. Intellectual error means 
to doubt one’s true Self, and results in seeing objects 
as Eternal. So, faith in the growth of one’s spiritual 
experiences (faith in what one experiences through 
their inner eye) is essential. Faith in the spiritual 
teacher and their instructions is needed. 

Even well-meaning family and friends may cause 
one to doubt their inner spiritual feelings; others do 
not know what is in one’s own spiritual heart. Thus, 
it is advised to hold onto what one knows from 
experience. Then, one’s mind will continually 
maintain correct intellectual judgments for spiritual, 
mental, and physical health. 








Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 13: Ayurvedic Psychology, Ethics, and Spiritual Counseling 


Yamas 

Results of Following Yama 

Ahimsa 

no one feels enmity towards your 

Truth 

one's word becomes reality 

Non-Stealing 

wealth of gems is attained 

Brahmacharya 

power to infuse energy and knowldege 
unto the humbler ones grows 

Non-acceptance 

knowledge of previous births is gained 

Niyamas 

Results of Following Niyama 

Purity 

mind becomes sattwic (pure and holy) 

Contentment 

incomparable felicity is gained 

Tapas 

mental and physical impurities vanish 


Spiritual Ayurveda 

If money is lost, nothing is lost. 

If health is lost, something is lost. 

But if character is lost, everything is lost. 

Smiles 

As discussed earlier, the root cause of all i ll ness 
is a lack of faith or connection with the Divine. Loss 
of love of one’s inner, highest Self is the first stage in 
the development and cause of disease. Thus, if one 
devotes themselves to loving and thinking of them¬ 
selves in the highest, most Divine sense, the root of 
il lness is most easily eradicated. 

To gain a deeper spiritual insight into Ayurveda, 
we look at the ancient Vedic scriptures that describe 
three bodies, or sheaths, that each human being has. 

1) Physical Body: (Sthula Sharlra) is where the 3 
humors, Vayu, Pitta, and Kapha are the main ener¬ 
getic operating forces. Included in the physical body 
are 16 attributes, 5 sense organs, 5 organs of action, 5 
elements and the mind (connected with the senses). 


There are two causes of lack of health, as discussed 
earlier, mind and body. Physical sorrow results in the 
loss of equilibrium of the doshas. Mental sorrow 
arises from anger, greed, desire, attachment, fear, 
melancholy, envy, and inability to attain desired ob¬ 
jects. Troubles are also twofold, creatures and spir¬ 
its. The first comes from the self and other people, 
animals, insects, and the like. The second comes from 
spirits (i.e., various forms of negativity) and weak 
planets found in one’s Jyotish astrology chart). 

21 Astral Body: (Sukshma Sharlra) consists of 17 
attributes: 

Five senses of knowledge (attributes 1 through 5) 
Five senses of action (attributes 6 through 10) 

Five life-breaths (attributes 11 through 15) 

Intellect, ego (attribute 16) 

Mind, mind’s heart (attribute 17) 

It is not the physical organs (i.e., eyeball, nose, etc.), 
but the senses—sight, smell, vision, etc.—that pro¬ 
vide information. Their physical l im bs do not consti¬ 
tute actions, their essence does. 


















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Senses of Knowledge Life-Breath Assistants 


Ruler 

Rules 

Naga 

hiccuping 

Kurme 

opening the mouth 

Krikara 

sneezing 

Devadatta 

yawning 

Dhananjaya 

nutrition 


Sense 

Ruler 

Home 

Sight 

Sun 

eyeball 

Healing 

Dik 

ear hole 

Smell 

Ashvini Kumar 

nostril 

Taste 

Varuna 

tongue 

Touch 

Vayu 

skin 


Senses of Action 


Sense 

Ruler 

Home 

Speech* 

Agni 

organ of 
speech 

Grasp 

Indra 

palm 

Walk 

Upendra 

foot 

Excrete 

Yama** 

anus 

Urinate/ 

pass semen 

Prajapati 

genitals 


Senses of Life-Breaths 


Vayus 

Direction/ 

Property 

Home 

Pran 

out 

heart 

Apan 

down 

anus 

Saman 

digests food/equal 

navel 

Udan 

up 

throat 

Vyaan 

distributes digested food/ 
throughout 

whole body 


Senses and Sub-Senses 


Sense 

Mind 

Ruler 

Determination/ 

Irresolution 

Moon 

sub-sense 

Mind's Heart ( Chitta ) 

Ruler 

Inquisitiveness 

Achyuta 

Sense 

Intellect 

Ruler 

Arriving at a conclusion 

Brahma 

sub-sense 

Self ( Ahamkara ) 

Ruler 

Ego 

Samkara 


This subtle or astral body is also 
where the chakras exist. 


3) Causal or Essential Body: (Karana Sharlra) 
surrounds the other two bodies in an oval or egg shape. 
It is the seed form of all attributes of the other two 
bodies. Yet, there are no attributes to it, just as an 
entire tree is contained in the seed but no tree is found 
at this level. The causal body consists of the five 
tanmatras (primal sensory energies, before they 
develop into the five senses) and the primal energies 
that develop into the elements (in the astral and 
physical bodies). Thirty-five astral potentials and 16 
physical potentials exist here. Within this seed are 
the person’s karmic impressions that motivate them 
through each birth. The causal body is located in the 
spiritual heart, situated just to the right of the center 
















































Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 13: Ayurvedic Psychology, Ethics, and Spiritual Counseling 


of the chest. 

Creation itself emerges from this Supreme energy, 
for it is the cause of causes. It is the knowledge of 
oneness of all things with the Creator (Brahma). Being 
one, it causes many, yet ‘the many’ are essentially 
the one, just as a plate, a mug, and a pitcher are 
essentially all clay. It is called the delight cell due to 
its abundance of delight. One can experience delight 
through self-luminous experience. It is also called 
pralaya, or universal sound sleep, because the 
universe is annihilated in this body. Upon waking 
from sound sleep one may feel, “It was so peaceful, I 
was not aware of anything.” 

It is called a sheath because it conceals its true 
delight and properties. This sheath is the cause of 
ignorance. It has two energies, abaran and bikshepa 
(concealment and hallucination). A person may think 
the sun has become nonexistent when a cloud covers 
it. Similarly, a person may believe the causal body is 
nonexistent due to concealment by the causal sheath. 
It is the illusion that prevents persons from realizing 
their true inner nature. A piece of rope may appear to 
look l ik e a snake. Similarly, the Soul may appear to 
be the actor. One may say, “I am a happy, a sad, or an 
infatuated person.” This creates various illusions of 
life (maya). Properly stated, the reality of life is, “I 
am eternal and unchanging. Happiness or sadness is 
an ever-changing illusion.” 

Hairs grow of themselves, vegetables grow of 
themselves, so the first two bodies, the physical and 
astral, automatically grow from the causal body. The 
causal body grows by itself. No other reason exists 
for it to happen. 


5 Delight Cells 

The three bodies are divided into five cells, food, 
life, mind, knowledge, and delight. 


Body 

Cell 

Element 

Material 

Food 

Earth 

Astral 

Life, Mind, 
Knowledge 

Water, Fire, Air 

Causal 

Delight 

Ether 


1. Food Cell (Annamaya Kosha): The physical body 
is made up of food taken from the parents and 
transformed into semen and blood. Its cell or sheath 
hides the Soul, as a husk hides the grain. Thus, the 
Soul appears to be divided and troubled by birth, life, 
and death, when actually it is eternal —the creator of 
these processes. 

2. Life Cell (Pranmaya Kasha): This cell involves 
the fire organs of action and the 5 life breaths. The 
life sheath has concealed the true nature of the 
passionless Soul, making it seem full of passion. It 
makes the speechless Soul seem to be the orator and 
the desireless Soul seem to be full of desire. 

3. Mind Cell (Manomaya Kosha): This sheath 
includes the 5 senses of knowledge and mind, hiding 
the true nature of the Soul. The result is that the 
doubtless Soul appears as doubting, the sightless Soul 
appears to see, the sorrowless Soul seems full of 
sorrow, etc. 


4. Knowledge Cell (Vighanamaya Kosha): This 
cell comprises the 5 senses of knowledge and the 
intellect. It conceals the true nature of the Soul by 
appearing as the doer or knower. It gives the Soul 
ego, action, name, fame, pride, etc. 

5. Delight Cell (Anandamaya Kosha): Delight 
constitutes love, delight, and enjoyment, concealing 
the true nature of the Soul which is beyond relative 
experiences of love, delight, etc. (i.e., these relative 













The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


experiences have a beginning and end. The Soul is a 
never-ending experience of Divine love, etc.). This 
cell appears as the causal body of all beings. 


Devotion: 

The Best Ayurvedic Medicine 

Through devotion or attention to the eternal 
Divine state of life, one heals and prevents disease 
and ultimately develops and attains Self-Realization, 
the goal of Ayurveda. For spiritual healing, a personal 
or devotional approach is crucial. Some people believe 
in Krishna, some in Jesus, others in Buddha, still 
others commune with their God through music. 
Devotion is considered the major healing practice of 
Ayurveda, for it is only through scidhanci (devotional 
meditations or prayer) prescribed by one’s spiritual 
teacher or guru that karmic diseases can be erased 
and persons can merge with their beloved form of 
God. 

In order to find a qualified teacher, or guru, one 
first must decide what one is looking for. Different 
gurus teach different subjects, much as is done in 
school. Many teach about powers, fame, and fortune. 
However, only a rare few teach simple, natural Self- 
Realization. A tme guru is one who, at first sight, 
produces bliss or pleasure in a person. Also, they will 
charge students no fees for training. 

Some people who have already been following a 
guru may feel they have learned all they can and need 
to move on to another guru. The Vedic scriptures not 
only validate this feeling, but suggest it is necessary 
for the student to make the change if and when the 
time comes. Specifically, the Vedas state that if a 
student has spent at least a year sincerely following a 
teacher’s guidance and still does not have pleasant 
results, they have the right and obligation to change 
teachers. Thus, even the choosing of one’s guru is 
very much along the Ayurvedic lines of taking control 
of one’s health; self-responsibility. Persons are 
cautioned against blindly following teachers. The 
scriptures say that 3 aspects to knowing Truth exist: 
the words of the guru, the words of the scripture, and 
the experiences of the pupil. Only when all 3 are 
corroborated does one feel confidant that something 
is true. 


In this state one embraces everyone and everything 
as the same (Divine) Self. One sees all as themselves; 
everything inside, outside, and in between is the same 
Divine eternal Self. The Divine Self is all that exists. 
Then, no separation can exist; no cause for wanting 
or longing can arise. When longing ceases to be, no 
suffering or disease can develop. Suffering only 
results from seeing something as separate from 
oneself and desiring to make it yours. Sadness 
develops because one misses that from which they 
believe they are separated. Once this illusion is seen 
through, the cause of suffering vanishes, just as the 
darkness cast by a cloud disappears once the sun 
shines unobstructed. 

This is the Vedantic goal of life and the Ayurvedic 
goal as well. Thus, following one’s personal spiritual 
path is the best Ayurvedic medicine. 

While the importance of having a spiritual guru 
has been discussed, not everyone will find or desire a 
guru. In this case, one is advised to listen to their 
inner guru. The inner guru is the highest guru. 


Origin of the Spiritual Body 

The Vedic scriptures, the S rut is, discuss the spider 
that produces thread from within itself. The thread is 
woven into a web, and then withdrawn back into its 
own body. This is said to be analogous to the universe 
that is produced from Eternal Consciousness 
(Chaitanya) and then vanishes into itself. This is the 
only cause of creation. Further, it is said that from a 
mere ‘glance’ of the consciousness, its energy begins 
to move outward (with tamas —lethargy or 
destruction— as its main quality) and the sky (ether) 
is created. Consciousness then glances at the sky and 
air, or Vayu is produced. Glancing at Vayu, fire ( tejas) 
is then created. From consciousness are produced by 
tamas, the destroyer of the in-gazing at tejas, water 
(ap) is bom. Fastly, earth distinguishable. These 5 
elements are essential (pritivi) is created from 
consciousness glancing or undivided. The spiritual 
and material bodies at water. They are distinguishable 
because they are created from them. 





Section 3: Therapeutics Chapter 13: Ayurvedic Psychology, Ethics, and Spiritual Counseling 


5 Senses of Knowldege 

5 Essential Elements 

5 Organs of Action 

Sattwa 

Elements 

Rajas 

1. Hearing (ear) 

1. Sky/ether 

1. Tongue 

2. Touch (skin) 

2. Air 

2. Hand 

3. Sight (eye) 

3. Fire 

3. Feet 

4. Taste (tongue) 

4. Water 

4. Genitals 

5. Smell (nose) 

5. Earth 

5. Anus 

heart 

all 5 essential elements 

vital energy (life) 


Five Senses of Knowledge 

(sense of hearing, sight, smell, taste, and touch) origi¬ 
nate in the scittwic portions of the five elements. Five 
organs of action (tongue, hands, feet, anus, and geni¬ 
tals) originate in the rajasic (action) portions of the 
five elements. 

The 5 senses of knowledge are sattwic, while 
the 5 organs are rajasic. 

Sound is produced in the sky (Akash). The ears 
hear the sound and the tongue produces the sound. 

Air (Vayu) can be felt (touched) on the skin, and 
the hands grasp through touch. 

Fire‘s (Tejas) attributes are beauty and form. The eye 
appreciates this movement (seen as gracefulness) and 
comes from the feet that move. 

Water's (Ap) attribute is taste. The tongue tastes, 
and the sexual organ is the main source of delightful 
sensation. For example, the sense of taste is on the 
tongue, producing delightful taste, and the action of 
delight is felt from the genitals. 

Earth 's (Pritivi) attribute is smell, and the anus is 
the primary discharging channel of malodorous smell, 
as stool. 


The heart has 4 aspects: mind, intellect, 
heart, and ego. 

Aspect 

Function 

Mind 

resolution and 

irresolution 

Intellect 

decision making 

Heart 

inquisitiveness 

Ego 

self-existence 


Vital energy has 5 aspects: pran, apan, 
saman, udan, vyan 


The spiritual body has 2 parts: individual 
and universal 


Universal: Consciousness or Supreme Self, living 
in the universal spiritual body, is called Sutratma 
(thread of the Self) because it is the common thread 
in every object, like a thread in beads. It is also called 































The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Hiranyagarbha and prana because it possesses 
knowledge, will, and energy created by the 5 essential 
elements. This Hiranyagarbha is finer than the 
material elements. Within the body one feels as 
though in a state of half-sleep. Three cells— 
knowledge, mind and delight—exist here. Here the 
Soul possesses will, desire, etc., just as in the waking 
state; only it is not material. Thus, it is called the state 
of absorption of the material elements. 

Individual: Consciousness (Chaitanya), living in the 
individual spiritual body, has a brilliant inner sense. 
It is finer than the individual material body; one feels 
the existence of the brilliance as the state of half¬ 
sleep. Three cells also exist in this state with will, 
desire, etc., and are also called the absorption of the 
material body. That is, the individual material body 
exists in seed form in the individual spiritual body. 

Individual and universal spiritual bodies mentally 
experience the sounds concerning enjoyable objects 
(enjoying objects in secret). 


In addition to universal and individual spiritual 
bodies, individual and universal material bodies also 
exist. The individual material body arises from 
separate objects of knowledge (e.g., a tree, a drop of 
water, etc.). The universal material body is bom of 
knowledge of objects in combination (e.g., forest, 
lake). The food cell and material body are products 
of foods arising from the transformation of edible 
fluids and material enjoyment respectively. 

Consciousness in the universal material body is 
called Vaiswanara because it functions in all humans 
as a whole. It is also called Viral because it has various 
manifestations. This is the awakening of the universal 
material body. 

Consciousness in the individual material body is 
called Viswa and functions as ego in different material 
bodies while maintaining the spiritual body. This is 
the awakening of the individual material body. In the 
waking state, these two material bodies perceive the 
material world through the senses (Bahihpragha). 


Origin of the Physical Body 

Hiranyagarbha or Supreme God, residing in the 
universal spiritual body, divides the 5 essential 
elements with 5 material elements. This happens with 
a ‘glance’, for revealing Himself in material form. 
The material world was created from these elements. 

The 5 essential elements are divided into 2 parts 
(10). The first 5 parts are each divided into 4 equal 
parts. These smaller parts of each element are added 
to the other half of each element. These 4 equal parts 
combine with the half-elements, producing the 
material elements. Each material element is made up 
of 1/2 material element (i.e., water ( ap) is 1/2 material 
water, 1/8 essential sky (akasha), 1/8 essential air 
(Vayu), 1/8 essential fire (tejas), and 1/8 essential 
earth (pritivi). [see diagram on next page] 

From these 5 divided or material elements, the 14 
worlds have been created (7 worlds above and 7 
worlds below). In these 14 worlds the material bodies 
of 4 different kinds of beings are bom (from the 
womb, egg, sweat, and earth). Their food and drinks 
are also produced in these worlds. 



















Section 3: Therapeutics 


Chapter 13: Ayurvedic Psychology, Ethics, and Spiritual Counseling 


Composition of the Five Elements 


/ Material Element / Esseiitial Elements/ / 

1/2 Ether 

1/8 

Air 

1/8 

Fire 

1/8 

Water 

1/8 

Earth , 


Ether Material Element 


Material Element Essent ial E lements / 


1/2 Air 

1/8 

1/8 

1/8 

1/8 


Ether 

Fire 

Water 

Earth 


Air Material Element 


/ 

Material Element 

/ Essential Elements/ 

/ 

1/2 Fire 

1/8 

Ether 

1/8 

Air 

1/8 

Water 

1/8 

Earth 

/ 


Fire Material Element 




r 

Material Element 

/ Essential Elements/ 

1 

1/2 Water 

1/8 

Ether 

1/8 

Air 

1/8 

Fire 

1/8 

Earth 

f 


Water Material Element 




/ 

Material Element 

/ Esseiitial Elements/ 

/ 

1/2 Earth 

1/8 

Ether 

1/8 

Air 

1/8 

Fire 

1/8 

Water 

/ 


Earth Material Element 













































The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 




J MjdxrLcmljcjCLL 







Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 14: Circulatory System 


Section 4: 

Specific Illnesses and Diseases: 
Signs and Symptoms, Cause, 
Development, and Therapies 





The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 






Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 14: Circulatory System 


Chapter 

System 

Diseases, Conditions, Topics 

Page 

14 

Circulatory 

Raktapitta, anemia, heart diseases, blood pressure, 
arteriosclerosis, paraplegia 

355 

15 

Digestive 

Anorexia, vomiting, diarrhea/dysentery, digestive and 
abdominal disorders, jaundice, gall stones, dyspepsia, 
indigestion, gastroenteritis, colic, hyperacidity, gastritis, 
malabsorption, food allergies, parasites, constipation, 
hemorrhoids, obesity, Candida, ulcers, toxin (, ama ) 

363 

16 

Infections/ 

Wounds 

Fever, abscess, sinus, wounds, ulcers, fractures/dislocations 

393 

17 

Respiratory 

Cough, breathing, hiccup, T.B., cold 

409 

18 

Urinary 

Stones, retention, gravel, obstruction, diabetes 

419 

19 

Ear/Nose/ 

Throat 

Ears, ear lobes, nose, throat, catarrh, hoarse throat, eyes, 
mouth disorders 

429 

20 

Nervous 

Nervous system, convulsions, sciatica, epilepsy, 
addictions, alcohol, fainting, coma, wasting, multiple 
sclerosis, Parkinson’s, Alzheimer’s 

457 

21 

Skin 

Warts, skin disorders, leukoderma, herpes zoster 

479 

22 

Neoplasm 

Scrotum, hernia, fistula, elephantiasis, tumors, cancer 

493 

23 

Reproductive 

Female reproductive, pregnancy/childbirth, grahas 
(planets afflicting newborns), male reproductive, prostate, 
venereal diseases 

503 

24 

Immune 

HIV/AIDS, epstein barr 

527 

25 

Metabolic 

Edema, meningitis, tonsillitis, gingivitis, dental abscess, 
goiter, hypo- hyperthyroid gout, thirst 

531 

26 

Miscellaneous 

3 vital mannas (heart, bladder, head), arthritis/rheumatism, 
dangerous spiritual practices, herbs for dhcitus and organs, 
gland definitions, herb doses and times; recipes, mutually 
contradictory foods, herbal preparation, use, and mixing; 
acupuncture 

541 

27 

External 

Beauty Care, Jyotish - Vedic Astrology, Vedic 
Architecture, Feng Shui, Scientific Research 

557 


With the understanding of Tridosha theory and the 
various therapies available in Ayurveda, this section 
looks at each individual illness and disease. Here, is 
described in detail, the cause, signs and symptoms 
(including the hidden symptoms), path of 
development, and therapeutic suggestions. When 
different doshas are responsible for various forms of 


an illness or disease, they are discussed individually. 

The index above shows the disorders covered in 
this section, grouped according to the various bodily 
systems. In a few cases, some of the disorders can be 
related to two systems and so will be discussed at the 
end of one chapter and related to the next system 
(chapter) as well. 


































The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Blood Circulation 

Principal Veins and Arteries 



Median Vein of Forearm 


Pulmonary Artery 
Axillary Vein 


Common Hepatic Artery 
Cephalic Vein 
Basilic Vein 
Splenic Artery 
Vein 
Cubital Vein 
Radial Vein 
Renal Artery 
Renal Vein 
Aorta 


Internal Jugular Vein 
Common Carotid Artery 
Subclavian Vein 
Subclavian Artery 
Superior Vena Cava 
Axillary Artery 
Pulmonary Vein 
Brachial Artery 
Inferior Vena Cava 
Hepatic 
Portal vein 

Radial 

Ulnar 
Superior 

Mesenteric Artery 
Common Iliac Artery 

Internal Iliac Artery 


External Iliac Artery 


Femoral Artery Great Saphenous Vein 


Femoral Vein 

















Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 14: Circulatory System 


Vaghabhata excels in sutrasthana. 
Sushruta excels in sanrasthana. 

Charak excels in chikitsd 
preface in Charak Samhita 


Chapter 14 
Circulatory System 

Bleeding, Anemia, Heart, Blood Pressure, Arteriosclerosis, Paraplegia 


Bleeding (Raktapitta) 

evelopment: The causes of bleeding 
iFf 1 delude overeating or drinking substances 
that increase Pitta, (e.g., red peppers, gar¬ 
lic, onions, alcohol; penetrating, pungent, sour, or 
salty tastes), animal products, dry vegetables; excess 
junk food or pastries after an excess of food. The 
excessed Pitta (blood or hemoglobin by-product) 
opens the entrances of circulation channels. It then 
enters these channels and mixes with the blood, cir¬ 
culates throughout the body, and blocks the chan¬ 
nels. The blood and Pitta vitiate or aggravate each 
other because they are both of a heating nature. As 
the heat increases, it becomes malodorous, and be¬ 
gins to penetrate vessel and tissue cell walls. Thus, it 
diminishes the clotting process and produces bleed¬ 
ing. The liver and spleen are the origin sites of bleed¬ 
ing. When Pitta is in liquid form, it is related to ranjaka 
and pachaka (which are in the stomach, liver, and 
spleen). Bleeding is due to Pitta associated with Kapha 
(and a little Vayu). Examples of bleeding diseases 
are hemophilia, purplish skin patches (purpura), and 
an excess of red blood corpuscles (polycythemia 
vera). 

Premonitory or Incubatory Signs: Heaviness of head, 
loss of appetite or taste causing burning sensations in 
the chest (which then produces indigestion), needing 
cold things and feeling hot, fumes coming from the 
stomach or mouth, increased acidity, vomiting or the 
fear of vomiting from seeing vomited materials, foul 
smelling vomit, cough, difficult breathing, dizziness, 
exhaustion, smelling or tasting iron, blood, and raw 


fish; burps of sour taste and vinegary smell, loss of 
voice, reddish, yellowish, or greenish eyes, skin, nails, 
urine, or feces; nose, mouth, ear and eye excretions; 
pimples, body ache, indistinguishability of blue, red, 
and yellow colors, seeing red, yellow, or blue colors 
in dreams. 

Features: Bleeding from the facial orifices (nose, 
mouth, ears, eyes, throat), from the lower orifices 
(penis, urethra, vagina, genital tract, or rectum), from 
all channels, through hair follicles on the skin, or si¬ 
multaneously through upper and lower orifices. 

Pitta is the primary dosha causing bleeding. Kapha 
is the secondary dosha for upper orifice bleeding. 
Vayu is the secondary dosha for lower orifice bleed¬ 
ing. All three doshas are the secondary cause of si¬ 
multaneous upper and lower orifice bleeding. 

When vitiated blood (Rakta Pitta) becomes mixed 
with Kapha, it becomes dense, pale yellow, oily, and 
slimy. When Rakta Pitta is associated with Vayu, it 
becomes gray, reddish, foamy, thin, and non-oily. If 
Rakta Pitta is further vitiated by Pitta, it becomes pale 
red and black. When two, or all three doshas, vitiate 
the blood, the signs and symptoms of the respective 
doshas occur. [Generally Pitta causes vitiated blood, 
but later it may mix with Kapha or Vayu to cause 
what is referred to as Kapha-caused bleeding or Vayu- 
caused bleeding. Secondary-Jo,y/zo mles are the same 


yO 









The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


for other diseases (e.g., fevers that are mainly Pitta- 
caused or for tumors that are mainly Vayu-caused). 
When the aforementioned primary doshas mix with 
the other doshas, they create fevers or tumors said to 
be caused by the other respective doshas.] 

Upper Bleeding 

This is indicated by bleeding from the nose, mouth, 
and ears. These diseases can be healed through 
purgation with Pitta-relieving herbs (bitters—e.g., 
musta, chirayatd, kutki; and astringents— mahjishthd, 
red raspberry, turmeric) that also relieve Kapha. After 
Kapha has been balanced, sweet herbs also can be 
used to balance Pitta. Upward bleeding mainly leads 
to association with Kapha. 

Lower Bleeding 

Places of lower bleeding include the rectum, 
urethra, and genitals. These diseases are controllable 
through emesis and sweet, moist, Vayu-reducing 
herbs. Downward bleeding mainly leads to 
association with Vayu. 

Purgatives help reverse the direction of vomiting, 
whereas vomiting reverses the direction of lower 
orifice bleeding. 

If bleeding is associated with only one dosha it 
can be healed. If two doshas are associated with the 
bleeding, it cannot be healed, but it may be controlled. 
Simultaneous bleeding cannot be healed because no 
herb or therapy can produce simultaneous healing 
results. Tridoshic herbs are recommended (e.g., 
gokshura, gotu kola, guduchl, coriander, bhrihgardj, 
triphald). Bleeding from both directions leads to 
association with Vayu and Kapha. 

Complications: Mainly hoarseness, but also 
weakness, anorexia, indigestion, difficult breathing, 
coughing, fever, diarrhea, edema, consumption, and 
anemia can develop. 

Bleeding Therapies 

After determining the cause, direction (and its main 
and secondary doshas), the strength of the person and 
the disease, the person’s constitution, season and stage 
of disease, either reducing (purificatory) or toning 
(palliative) therapies are begun. 

When a strong person has mild bleeding— 


produced by any one dosha (without other 
complications), therapy is begun. 

If bleeding is caused by over nourishment and the 
person is strong (and their muscles are strong), then 
it is not advised to stop the bleeding immediately 
because the doshas are mixed with drna and will have 
a natural tendency to be eliminated. Premature 
stoppage of bleeding can cause many problems such 
as throat obstructions, bad smell in the nose, fainting, 
anorexia, fever, benign tumors, enlarged spleen, 
constipation, skin diseases, difficult urination, 
hemorrhoids, abscesses, and poor complexion (but if 
the person is weak and the doshas are diminished, 
then it is necessary to stop the bleeding). 

Fasting and Nourishing Therapies: Since Pitta and 
blood become aggravated due to dma, fasting is the 
first line of therapy. This holds true for upward 
bleeding, dma, aggravated Kapha, or if hot and oily 
factors caused the bleeding. For all other causes 
nourishing therapy is used. 

The Charak Samhitd (Chikitsdsthdnam Ch. 4 verses 
31-35) suggest the following therapies, 

Upper Bleeding During the earliest stage, a 
soothing tonic is given, boiling 12 grams of herbs 
[date palm sugar, grape juice, bitter herbs (e.g., musta, 
dmalakl, bhrihgardj, gokshura, mahjishhd, jasmine), 
sandalwood and licorice] in 3.072 liters 
(approximately 3 quarts) of water until half the water 
is left. It is then cooled and taken with cane sugar 
(tarpana). 

Downward Bleeding In the earliest stage, rice flour 
boiled with 11 parts water (peyd) is taken. This is a 
very good and time-tested remedy for hemorrhagic 
dysentery. Herbs appropriate for balancing the 
excessed dosha{ s) are used for both upward and 
downward bleeding. For one desiring sour tastes, 
dmalakl and pomegranate teas are used. 

Sweet, nourishing liquids are useful in the earli¬ 
est stage of bleeding, even when Kapha is involved, 
because they alleviate Pitta (the predominantly 
excessed dosha. x ; 










Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 14: Circulatory System 


Other Therapies 


Cause 

overeating 

Dosha( s) 

multiple doshas 

Upper 

Bleeding 

purgation therapy advised* 

Lower 

Bleeding 

emesis/and depending upon 
person’s strength - palliative 
or nourishing therapy* 


For purgation or emesis, one needs to have a strong 
digestion and constitution. Persons need to be 
prepared for the therapies, and should have no 
complications. These therapies are useful only when 
bleeding is caused by over nourishment and an excess 
of aggravated doshas. Muscle tissue also must be 
strong, and therapies should be practiced only during 
their appropriate times of day and seasons. 


Ashtanga Hridayam Therapies 


Upper Bleeding 

Lower Bleeding 

1st: Com Flour with 
Cold water, ghee, and 
cane sugar 

1st: Boiled semi- 
watery rice (peyd ) 

2nd: Bitter/astringent 
herbs, teas can also 
include moistening 
herbs like sandalwood; 
fasting 

2nd: Sweet 
nourishing herbs 


Foods that alleviate bleeding disorders include rice, 
mungdal, lentils, chick peas, kidney beans, neem, 
chirdyatd, steamed bitter vegetable soups, and ghee. 
When bleeding is associated with Kapha, more 
diuretic vegetables are used. Simple meals may be 
made from watery-cooked rice (peyd) with ghee and 
bald. 

Should thirst be accompanied by bleeding, sev¬ 
eral therapies are useful: tea made with bitter herbs 


or fruit juices that are sweet or bitter (e.g., grape or 
cranberry). Should one have a strong digestion and 
constitution, they may drink water until satisfied. 
However, for all others, water is taken in small quan¬ 
tities. 

For Vayu-caused bleeding, demulcent herbs like 
comfrey, bald, and vamsha lochana are very helpful. 



Anemia (Pandu-roga) 

Development: When the doshas become 
aggravated, and Pitta is mostly excessed, the Pitta in 
the heart is forced into the arteries and veins attached 
to the heart. It is Vayu that causes Pitta to move and 
then spread throughout the body. Pitta then vitiates 
Kapha, skin, blood, and muscles, causing them to 
turn yellowish white (most common color), deep 
yellow, or green. Five kinds of anemia exist: Vayu, 
Pitta, Kapha, Tridosha, and a kind from eating mud. 

Premonitory Signs: Heart palpitation, dry s kin , loss 
of taste and appetite, yellowish urine, not sweating, 
poor digestion, weakness, and exertion. 

Symptoms: The tissues become heavy and loose, 
ojas is burnt up; thus damaging the health of the blood 
and fat. Tissues become flabby, the heart rate 
increases, and eye sockets swell; there is debility, 
anger, and expectorating of phlegm. Other symptoms 
include loss of speech, dis lik e of food and cold things, 
hair loss, poor digestion, weak thighs, fever, difficult 
breathing, constant ear noise, dizziness, and exertion. 

Vayu: Body aches, piercing pain, tremors, blackish 
red complexion; discoloration of veins, nails, feces, 
urine, and eyes; edema, gas, astringent taste, dry feces, 
pain in the ribs and head, dry skin, anxiety, insomnia, 
and constipation. 

Pitta: Veins, nails, feces, urine, and eyes are green 
and/or yellowish, fever, unconsciousness, thirst, per¬ 
spiration, fainting, a desire for cold things, body odor, 
bad breath, bitter taste, loose bowels, yellow urine 




















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


and stool, acidity, burning sensation. 

Kapha: Veins, skin, face, eyes, urine, and stool are 
white; there is stupor, salty taste, hair standing on 
end, loss of voice, excess phlegm and salivation, 
cough and vomiting, edema, overweight, sleepiness, 
and heaviness of the limbs. 

Tridosha: Symptoms of all doshas appear, and are 
difficult to bear. 

Mud : Habitual eating of astringent mud aggravates 
Vayu. Eating salty mud aggravates Pitta. Sweet mud 
aggravates Kapha. Plasma and other tissues are 
vitiated by the dryness of mud that further dries the 
tissue’s channels. Mud does not get digested and fills 
and blocks the channels. This produces edema in the 
abdomen, legs, face, and genitals; parasites develop 
in the alimentary tract, feces are warm, watery, and 
mixed with blood and mucus, weakened sense organs, 
loss of physical strength, life sap (ojas) complexion, 
and digestion. Anemia develops thereafter. 

Amoebic Dysentery : Yellow skin; wide, white eyes. 

Therapies 

General : After unction, strong emesis and 
purgation (using bitter herbs) are required. A 
wholesome diet is then followed (according to one’s 
dosha). Rice, barley, wheat, green gram (rniing) soup, 
lentils, and ghee are eaten along with herbs that 
balance one’s dosha and symptoms. Sesame seeds, 
pomegranates, black grapes, and cane sugar or 
molasses help build the blood. The Ayurvedic iron 
ash (loha bhasma) quickly helps build blood. 
Chyavan Prdsh, ghee, and saffron in warm milk, taken 
twice daily; and turmeric ghee are very helpful. 
Triphald and aloe vera gel cleanse the bowels and 
stimulate liver function. Other useful herbs include 
mahjishthd, shatdvarl, and punarnavd. 

Vayu : Organic yogurt, boiled milk, sesame oil, 
and ghee. Only steamed vegetables (i.e., not raw). 

Pitta : Salads, sprouts, green leaf vegetables, 
dandelion leaf, and red raspberry leaf. Chlorophyll 
cleanses bile and blood, kaftikd, barberry, chirdyatd 
(king of the bitters), aloe, and the main liver herb, 
bhudmalaki. 


for Kapha doshas. As with Vayu, steamed vegetables 
are required. 

Traditional Ghees (Ghrita): 

Dadimadya Ghrita: 160 gms. pomegranate 
(dadima), 80 gms. coriander (dhanyaka), 40 gms. 
each of chitraka and ginger (shunthl), 20 gms. of 
pippall. All are combined into a paste and cooked 
with 800 gms. of ghee and 2.56 litters (@2i/2 qts.). 
This ghee alleviates heart diseases, anemia, 
hemorrhoids, enlarged spleen, Kapha and Vayu 
disorders, difficult breathing, cough, and difficult 
labor (it is even said to aid conception in a sterile 
woman). 

Katukddya Ghrita: 41 gms. each of katukd, musta, 
turmeric, barberry, kutaj; 10 gms. each of patola, 
sandalwood, trdymdn, pippall, neem, cedar, 
chirdyatd. These herbs are pasted together and cooked 
with 640 gms. of ghee and 4 times as much organic 
milk. This recipe helps internal bleeding, fever, 
burning sensation, edema, fistula, hemorrhoids, 
menorrhagia, and s ki n eruptions. 

In more serious cases and for Kapha-caused 
anemia, harltaki ghee is taken to alleviate anemia, 
followed by emesis. Emesis is brought about by 
drinking large amounts of milk with emetic herbs. 


Sickle Cell Anemia 
(Yakrit Janya Raktalplata): 

Due to liver damage, red blood cells become sick 
and die earlier than normal. Iron supplements are not 
give in this case, although herbal irons such as 
punarnavd are useful. Purgatives are also useful. 



Kapha : Improves digestion and removes 
congestion with hot spices such as cinnamon, saffron, 
turmeric, or trikatu. Harltaki is another useful herb 















Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 14: Circulatory System 


Therapies: First, oil massage is applied, followed by 
strong emesis and purgation (if persons are strong 
enough). Wholesome foods and moderation of foods 
include basmati rice, barley, whole wheat, ghee soups, 
peas, lentils, and oils according to one’s dosha. Herbs 
include triphald, turmeric, guduchl, trikatu, musta, 
vidahga, chitrak, neem with honey; they are taken 
every morning with boiled mi lk and ghee. One-half 
cup yogurt with 1/2 cup water (Kapha takes 1/4 cup 
yogurt with 3/4 cup water) with punarnavd is ad¬ 
vised. Shildjit is also recommended. Black sesame 
seeds, pomegranates, black grapes, cane sugar, mo¬ 
lasses, and ghee; herbs of aloe gel, dmalakl, hantakl, 
saffron (or safflower), shatavari, mahjishthd, and 
punarnavd are all blood builders. 

Vdyu: Herbs include chitrak, coriander, Pippali, 
triphald, guduchl, ginger, raisins, taken with boiled 
mi lk . 

Pitta : Herbs include coriander, dandelion leaf, red 
raspberry leaf, nettles, chlorophyll, barberry, katukd, 
aloe gel, guduchl, musta, vidahga, neem, and grapes 
or raisins with boiled milk. Foods include leafy 
vegetables and sprouts. 

Kapha: Herbs include chitrak, coriander, pippali, 
trikatu, vidahga, musta, turmeric, saffron or safflower, 
cinnamon, neem, and ginger, taken with honey. Foods 
include raisins and Kapha-reducing items. 

Amoebic Dysentery: Kutaj and musta 


Heart Disease 
(Hridroga) 

Causes: Five causes of heart disease exist: Vayu, Pitta, 
Kapha, Tridosha, and that caused by parasites or in¬ 
fections. 

These disorders are caused by eating foods that 
are very hot, hard to digest, astringent, and bitter. They 
are also caused by excess fatigue, injury, reading aloud 
for many hours, excess worry, or suppression of 
natural urges. 

Development: The causes listed above create dosha 
excesses weakening plasma (rasa) tissue localizing 
themselves in the heart, causing pain. 

Angina, a common condition, results when the heart 


does not receive enough oxygen. This is usually re¬ 
sults from coronary artery disease. 

Symptoms: 

Vdyu: Severe pricking, piercing, bursting, 
constricting or splitting pain; dryness, immobility, 
emptiness, increased heart rate, unfounded 
helplessness, grief or fear, tremors, body contractions, 
dislike of noise, fainting or coma, obstructed 
breathing, tight chest, numbness, insomnia, difficult 
breathing, dry cough, dark rings around the eyes, 
hypersensitivity. Attacks occur after straining or from 
fear, anxiety, worry, etc.; and after fainting or nervous 
heart conditions. 

Pitta : Thirst, dizziness, fainting, burning 
sensation, severe sweating, acidity, exhaustion, 
vomiting (sourness) bile, hot fumes; yellowish skin, 
eyes, and stool; fever, flushed or bloodshot eyes, 
dizziness, inflammatory heart conditions (e.g., 
myocarditis, endocarditis, pericarditis). 

Kapha: Heart stiffness, heavy like a stone, 
coughing, poor digestion, expectorating mucus, 
excess sleep, lassitude, loss of taste and appetite, fever, 
congestive heart situations or cardiac edema. 

Tridosha: Symptoms of all three doshas. 

Parasites/infections : Eyes have black 
discoloration, fainting, heart feels oppressed or tom, 
dry, irritated skin, excess mucus expectoration. 

Therapies: 

General: Mental and physical rest; avoid worry, 
anger, etc. Persons need to meditate on what they 
truly would love to do with their lives. Gentle yoga 
or stretching is also useful to calm and integrate the 
mind and body. The main herb, arjuna, is useful for 
all forms of heart disease. It tones the heart and lungs, 
stimulates blood circulation, stops bleeding, promotes 
tissue healing, and strengthens the heart muscle. 
Additional therapies include ghee, ashwagandha, and 
saffron. For angina, arjuna and kushtha (VPK=) or 
hihg and sage (VK-) are useful. 

Vdyu: Ingesting Vayu-reducing foods and 






















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


liquids; oily vitamins of A, E, and D, garlic, rest. 

Pitta : The intake of Pitta-reducing foods and drinks, 
avoiding hot and pungent spices, salt, alcohol, garlic, 
onions, greasy foods, red meat. Herbs include arjuna, 
saffron, sandalwood, shatavari, gotu kola, aloe vera 
gel, katuka, and chitrak. Purgation is also useful. 

Kapha: Avoiding dairy, sugar, eggs, fatty meat, 
salt, and other cholesterol-producing foods, and 
remaining on a diet of Kapha-reducing foods and 
liquids. Herbs include arjuna, guggul, calamus, 
cardamom, trikatu. 

Tridosha: Combinations of the above respective 
therapies. 

Parasites: See Chapter 15 on parasites. Therapies 
include antiparasitical/anti-infection herbs. Dr. S. 
Sandhu’s clinical experience finds that arjuna chttrna 
works better for the congestive cardiac diseases; tamra 
bhasma (copper ash /yogendra rasa is one such 
formulation) or wearing a copper bracelet is the best 
for obstructive cardiac heart conditions. Modern 
medicine also divides the heart conditions into these 
two main types (i.e., congestive and obstructive). 

Other modem Ayurvedic authorities have found 
that constipation or diarrhea may be forcing air 
upwards, affecting the heart. Thus, just by regulating 
the stool, clients have found relief from some forms 
of heart disease. 


Hypertension/High Blood Pressure 

Its causes and therapies are similar to heart 
diseases. 

Additional causes and development: First, excess 
mental stress (i.e., worry, anxiety, tension) can be 
caused by Vayu. Second, certain hormonal imbal¬ 
ances (e.g., adrenal, thyroid, and reproductive hor¬ 
mones) can be caused by Pitta. Thus, obstruction of 
the blood or urinary channels ( srotas ) or kidney prob¬ 
lems can be caused by Kapha. Should gas, constipa¬ 
tion, or diarrhea be present, Apcina Vayu (downward 
air) may be forced upward, putting pressure on the 
heart. 


Symptoms: 

Vayu: Sudden changes in pressure, irregular or an 
erratic pulse—caused by worry, strain, overwork, 
nervousness, and insomnia. 

Pitta: Flushed face, red eyes, violent headaches, 
sensitivity to light, nose bleeds, anger, irritability, 
burning, sometimes with liver complications. 

Kapha: Constant high pressure, obesity, fatigue, 
edema, high cholesterol. 

Therapies: 

General: Arjuna strengthens the heart, especially 
if the pulse is weak. 

Vayu: Brain tonics such as gotu kola Jatdmdnshi, 
ashwagandha, shank pushpl, bhrihgardj, garlic, and 
a Vayu-reducing diet and lifestyle. Shirodharci (hot 
oil poured on the head for 7 to 14 sessions) also heal 
nerves and mental stress. 

Pitta : Aloe vera gel, chirdyatd, katuka, rhubarb, 
harmonizing herbs like shatavari, mahjishtha, musta, 
triphala, bald, gotu kola, and a Pitta-reducing diet 
and lifestyle. Garlic, onions, and other hot, salty, and 
pungent items will aggravate the condition. 
Shirodhara is also very helpful. 

Kapha: Myrrh, trikatu, arjuna, hawthorn berries, 
diuretics like gokshura, and a Kapha-reducing diet 
and lifestyle. Shirodhara is also very helpful. 

Long term use of blood-pressure medicine, or even 
herbs (i.e., sarpagandha), without balancing the 
underlying cause, will eventually cause side effects. 


Arteriosclerosis 

This condition relates to the blood vessels. The 
arteries thicken and harden because of deposits of 
cholesterol on the artery walls. This is one of the 
causes of hypertension: arteries loose their elasticity 
and cannot bear the pressure of blood flowing through 
them. 




















Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 14: Circulatory System 


Causes: High cholesterol and clogged arteries. 
Vayu: Hardened arteries. 

Pitta : Fat accumulation. 

Kapha: Fat accumulation. 

Therapies: similar to heart disease. 

General: Ariuna strengthens the heart, especially 
if the pulse is weak. 

Vayu: Garlic, yogaraj guggul, myrrh, and saffron 
in boiled milk . 

Pitta : Kaishore guggul, turmeric, aloe vera gel, 
katukd. 

Kapha: Garlic and purified guggul, myrrh, saffron. 


Hypotension/Low Blood Pressure 

Causes: Usually a Vayu disorder, it develops 
through debility, anemia, malnutrition, and other 
chronic diseases. 

Vayu: Caused by poor circulation. 

Pitta : Hormone imbalance, anemia, damaged liver. 
Kapha: Caused by congestion, phlegm, clogging, 
stagnation, blood flow reduction, dehydration, and 
edema. 

Therapies: 

General: Ariuna strengthens the heart, especially 
if the pulse is weak. 

Vayu: Garlic, turmeric, ginger, pippali, cardamom. 
Pitta : Bhudmalall, mahjishthd, gotu kola, 
turmeric, and saffron in aloe vera gel. 

Kapha: Trikatu, garlic, turmeric, ginger, pippali, 
cardamom. 

Paraplegia (Urustambha) 

Definition: Excess Kapha and fat derange Vayu and 
Pitta in the legs and stiffen them, causing immobility 
and coldness. Paraplegia is related to both the 
circulatory and digestive systems, so therapies need 
to address both systems. Western medicine considers 
this a nervous system disorder. 

Cause: This disorder can be caused by eating fatty, 
hot, light, and cold foods before digesting one’s last 


meal, or by eating moist or dry foods, yogurt, milk, 
meat, or drinking bad wine. Other causes include 
excessive naps, staying up too late, under- or 
overeating, exertion, fear, suppression of the natural 
urges, or oi li ness. Additional causes include toxins 
in the bowels (along with fat blocking any or all of 
the three doshas) that move to the legs and thighs 
through the blood vessels in the legs. This causes the 
buildup of excess fat to hamper leg coordination and 
restrict leg movement. 

This excess Kapha in the thighs causes heaviness, 
exhaustion, burning, pain, numbness, tearing pain, 
contraction, quivering, and piercing, that may even 
be life threatening. 

Western medicine only sees neurological-related 
causes such as, spinal chord injury, MS, acute 
transverse myelitis, and other similar diseases that 
cause lesions in the spinal chord. See chapter 20 for 
Nervous system disorders and therapies. 

Premonitory Signs: Brooding, sleepiness, feeling 
excessively wet, anorexia, fever, hair standing on end, 
vomiting, and lassitude in the calves and thighs of 
the legs. 

Symptoms: Excessive malaise of the legs, continuous 
burning and pain, feet ache when placed on the 
ground, no sensation to cold, unable to stand, feeling 
that the thighs are broken and carried by someone 
else. (If trembling, with burning and piercing pain, 
exists, the il lness cannot be healed unless it has just 
developed.) 

Precaution: Unction, emesis, purgation, and enema— 
although useful for all other diseases—will only 
aggravate this condition. With this condition, if the 
nervous system is weak and oil is applied to the legs, 
the symptoms are further aggravated, because unction 
and enema aggravate Kapha. Neither purgation nor 
emesis will remove Kapha in the legs (as it is well 
below the stomach, the seat of Kapha). 





























The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Therapies: Constant application of reducing and 
drying therapies removes the abundance of Kapha and 
toxins (dma). Foods include barley, warm, bitter and 
dry vegetables; herbs include neem, tripluild, harltaki, 
pippall, bilwa, sandalwood, musta, chitrak, and 
calamus with honey water. Salts and sweets must be 
avoided. 

If drying therapies cause excess dryness, then some 
ghee or canola oil with gokshura, calamus, 
ashwagandha, pippall, guggul, nirgundi, chitrak, and 


a small amount of rock salt are advised. These are all 
taken with honey and basmati rice. 

External: Measures include Kapha-reducing 
therapies such as massaging the legs with sand from 
anthills, powder from bricks, honey, mustard, and 
ashwagandha paste, and sprinkling water with a 
decoction of neem, bilwa, and gokshura. Massage is 
also done with Mahdndrdyan, pahchaguna, and 
vishgarbha oil. 













Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 15: Digestive System 


Physicians shouldn’t feel shy if they don’t know the nomenclature of the disease, 
for there is no rule, custom, or state that every disease has a name. 
Ashthahga Hridayam Su. Ch. 12: ver. 64 


Chapter 15 
Digestive System 

Anorexia, Vomiting, DiarrheaXDysentery, Digestive and Abdominal 
Disorders, Jaundice, Gallstones, Dyspepsia, Indigestion, Gastroenteritis, 
Colic, Hyperacidity, Acid Gastritis, Malabsorption, Food Allergies, Parasites, 
Constipation, Hemorrhoids, Obesity, Candida, Ulcers, Ama 


Anorexia (Arochaka) 



An excess of the doshas (individually or combined) 
or an apathetic mental state tends to block the heart 
region and the channels (srotas) that carry food (e.g., 
esophagus). This causes aversion to foods. 

Symptoms: Continual vomiting may occur, leading 
to dehydration. 

Vavu: Overeating Kapha-increasing foods 
causes tingling gums, an astringent taste in the mouth, 
severe weight loss, loss of appetite, fear, anxiety, in¬ 
somnia, chest and abdominal pains and cramps, pal¬ 
pitations, throat constriction, difficulty swallowing, 
and choking feelings. 

Pitta : Bitter and sour taste, bad smell in the 
mouth, burning sensations in the heart region. 

Kapha: Sweet or salty taste, Kapha-coated mouth, 
nausea, vomiting, exuding watery substance from the 
mouth or the nose, itching, heaviness of the body, 
water-brash, lethargy, and fatigue. 

Triclosha: Abnormal taste or absence of taste. 

Mental: Worry, anger, delusion, dullness, or other 
emotions, associated with a particular dosha. 

Therapies 
General: Herbs 

digestive herbs: cardamom, ginger 
to stop vomiting: red raspberry, ginger 
tonics: chyavan prash, ashwagandha 
nervines: gotu kola, sandalwood, jatamcinshl, 


ashwagandha. 

Foods —bland rice and mung dal. Avoid 
coffee, tea, drugs, stimulants. 

Massage —sesame oil applied to the feet and head, 
and .shim dhara. 

Aromas —sandalwood oil applied to the forehead. 

General Regimen: Different types of foods are 
combined with the person’s doslui-balmcmg foods. 
Bathing cleanses the body from outside. Light emesis 
is done twice daily for internal cleansing (morning 
and evening). Oral hygiene—brushing, eating rock 
candy with tulsl herb. 

Vavu —first, emesis should be induced with a 
vachd decoction. This is followed by an herbal tea 
made with pippali, cardamom, and vidahga powders. 
Pippall, vidahga, raisins, rock salt, ginger, and 
medicated wine can be ingested as an appetizer to 
stimulate hunger. 

Pitta —persons are administered an emetic with 
jaggery (cane sugar) juice. Also, cane sugar, ghee, 
salt, and honey should be eaten. 

Kapha —individuals are given an emetic with 
neem leaf decoction, ajwan, fennel, and alcohol 
mixed with honey. 

Tridosha —all of the above measures are used. 

Mind —herbs to calm the mind (e.g., brahml, 
ashwagandha, jatamanshl), providing consolation, 
sympathy, and cheerfulness, uncovering the cause of 
the trouble (e.g., disappointment with career), and 
planning strategies to change things for the better. 

£ 























The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Vomiting (Chardi) 

Causes: Vomiting is caused by the following: 
Vayu, Pitta, Kapha, Tridosha, and unpleasant sensory 
experience. Upward moving Vayu (Udcina) becomes 
abnormal and aggravates all the doshas causing them 
to move upward. 

Premonitory Symptoms: Nausea, salty taste in 
mouth, excess salivation, loss of taste and appetite. 

Symptoms: 

Vayu: Vomiting of food causes pain in the navel 
region, back, and ribs, regurgitating occurs a little at 
a time, with an astringent taste and frothy substance; 
it is blackish, thin, and is emitted only with difficulty 
and force. Other symptoms include belching, 
coughing, dry mouth, heart and head pain, hoarseness, 
and exhaustion. Vomiting caused by parasites, thirst, 
dma, and pregnancy are also caused by Vayu. 

Pitta: Vomit is ashen, brown, green, or yellow in 
color. It may be bloody, sour or bitter tasting, and 
hot. Thirst, fainting, heat, or burning sensations in 
the body may be felt. 

Kapha: Substance is oily, thick, cold and thready, 
sweet or salty tasting, and comes out in a large, 
continuous quantity; hair stands on end, the face 
swells, one feels a stupor, nausea, and cough. 

Tridosha: Symptoms of all the doshas appear. 

Senses: Seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, or 
touching unpleasant, dirty things, foul smells, disturb 
the mind, causing vomiting associated with heart 
region pain. 

Therapies: 

Only when vomiting is not associated with 
complications can it be healed. When severe vomiting 
occurs in persons who are weak, with bleeding or 
pus, or have a moon-like complexion, they cannot be 
healed. 

General: All forms of vomiting are due to gastric 
irritation. Therapies of lightening (exercise, 
sunbathing), and for Vayu-caused vomiting are used 
first. Hantakl with raw honey, or castor oil with boiled 
milk, reduces the upward motion of the doshas. An 
emetic is advised. Debilitated persons should use only 
pacifying measures. 

Vayu: Bilwa, barley, cardamom, cloves, coriander, 


ginger, raspberry, vamsha lochana, Pippall, black 
pepper, and garlic. If the person suffers heart 
palpitations, ghee, rock salt, yogurt, and pomegranate 
juice are recommended. 

Pitta : Neem, chirdyatd, bilwa, coriander, 
raspberry, vamsha lochana, sugar cane. If Pitta is 
excessed in the stomach, an emetic with sweet herbs 
(e.g., licorice) is administered to cleanse the stomach. 
Afterwards, one drinks a mixture of cooked barley 
with raw honey and cane sugar, or basmati rice with 
green lentil soup. Grapes and coconut are also useful 
foods. Amalakl, pittapapra, bald, and sandalwood 
may be mixed with food. 

Kapha: An emetic made with a decoction of 
pippall, neem, and rock salt cleanses the undigested 
food toxins (dma) from the stomach. Afterwards, (at 
meal time) barley may be eaten with neem and yogurt/ 
water (1/4:3/4), green lentils. Herbs include 
cardamom, bilwa, cloves, ginger, triphald, musta, and 
raspberry, which, when mixed with raw honey, stop 
vomiting. 

Tridosha: Herbs, foods, and other therapies advised 
for each dosha are used. Season, time of day, strength 
of the person, and their digestion, are all taken into 
consideration. 

Psychological Stress: Pleasant conversation, 
consolation, exhilaration, stories, socializing with 
friends all help reduce the stress that causes vomiting. 
Additionally, pleasant aromas and flowers, fermented 
drinks, sour fruits and vegetables all contribute to 
healing. 

If a person experiences any complications while 
vomiting, appropriate measures as described in the 
respective chapters are used. Long-term vomiting 
greatly aggravates Vayu. 

Thus, a Vayu-reducing diet (i.e., bulk- and 
semen-promoting foods and herbs) is used to restore 
balance and strength. 





Diarrhea (Atisara) and 
Dysentery (Pravahika) 

Cause: There are 6 forms of diarrhea: Vayu, Pitta, 
Kapha, Tridosha, fear and grief, and undigested food 




















Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 15: Digestive System 


(dma). Causes include drinking excessive amounts 
of water, eating very hot, dry, fatty, hard, cold, or 
unaccustomed foods, puddings, sesame seeds, 
sprouted grains, excess wines, overeating, eating be¬ 
fore the last meal is digested, and eating at unusual 
times. Further causes include improper oleation 
therapy, drinking bad water, excessive use of alco¬ 
hol, overdoing water sports, suppression of natural 
urges, hemorrhoids, intestinal parasites, changes in 
lifestyle, and seasonal changes. As accumulating 
Vayu becomes aggravated, it causes the Kapha (wa¬ 
tery element) to move downward, dampening the di¬ 
gestive fire before entering the alimentary canal. This 
causes the feces to become watery and produce diar¬ 
rhea. 

There are 5 types of dysentery: Vayu, Pitta, 
Kapha, Tridosha, and blood (raktapitta). 

Premonitory Signs: Prickling pain in the heart region, 
rectum, and alimentary tract; weak body, constipa¬ 
tion, gas, and indigestion. 

Symptoms: 

Vayu: Watery feces, small quantity, expelled with 
noise, severe pain, and difficulty. It may be dry, frothy, 
thin, rough, or scaly, slightly brown and frequently 
expelled. Alternatively, it may seem gooey, burnt, and 
slimy. One may experience a dry mouth, prolapsed 
rectum, hair standing on end, and straining to expel 
stools. 

Pitta : Yellow, black, algae green, blue, red, or deep 
yellow color, mixed with blood and foul smelling; 
thirst, fainting, perspiration, burning sensation, painful 
elimination, burning and ulcerated rectum. 

Kapha: Solid, slimy, thready, white, mucus, fatty, 
frequent, heavy, foul smelling, difficult elimination 
followed by pain, sleepiness, laziness, dislike of food, 
mild straining to eliminate stools or frequent and 
urgent need to eliminate. 

Tridosha: Symptoms of all three doshas simul¬ 
taneously. 

Fear/Grief: This situation can cause persons to 
eat very little. The heat of tears and secretions of the 
nose, mouth, and throat can increase and move to the 
alimentary tract to weaken digestion and blood tissue 
(rakta dhcitu). Vitiated blood is then expelled, mixed 
with feces or by itself. It is very difficult to heal. 


E motional causes increase Pitta and Vayu, causing 
liquid feces and diarrhea; feces are quick, warm, fluid, 
and float on water. Symptoms are the same as Vayu. 

Undigested Food (Ama): Diarrhea is of two types: 
1) with dma and without dma, and 2) mixed with 
blood and without blood. With dma, stools sink in 
the water, have a foul smell, are associated with 
intestinal gurgling; undigested food remains in the 
stomach, abdominal pain, excess salivation. 
Symptoms of “without dma ” feces have the opposite 
qualities. 

When food is not properly digested ( dma), doshas 
combine with dma and become excessed. They then 
travel in the wrong channels, weakening tissues 
(dhatus), waste products (malas), and cause frequent, 
multicolored feces and abdominal pain. 

If diarrhea is allowed to continue without being 
healed, it develops the disorders of the duodenum. 
This is discussed later. 

Therapies: 

General: Diarrhea caused by excess doshas (due 
to undigested food) needs to be eliminated. Initially, 
astringent herbs and foods are not used to stop 
diarrhea with dma (toxins) until the toxins are expelled 
with the stool. If the diarrhea is prematurely halted 
while dma is still in the body, it may cause various 
diseases (e.g., hemorrhoids, edema, anemia, tumors, 
fever, etc.). Rather, it is advised to allow initial dma 
diarrhea to come out, and even to induce it by taking 
haritaki. It is a part of the body’s defense mechanism 
to expel toxins (dma). Thus, stopping diarrhea when 
it is still toxic goes against the body’s natural healing 
process. 

Persons with a moderate dosha excess take 
decoctions to stimulate the appetite and strengthen 
the digestion. If doshas are greatly excessed, then 
lightening therapy (i.e., pahcha karma, etc.) is 
advised. 















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


General: Herbs include pippall, ginger, coriander, 
haritakl, calamus, gokshura, bilwa, fennel. 

Vdyu: (the same as Kapha) bald, gokshura, bilwa, 
ginger, coriander, calamus, pippall, chitrak, sour 
pomegranate, dashmul, dmalakl, ghee, and rock salt 
are taken with foods and drinks to strengthen the 
digestion and the constitution. 

Pain, gas retention, and the desire to pass urine or 

stool (but cannot): Are healed with bilwa, pippall, 
ginger, cane sugar, and sesame oil. 

Diarrhea with a dry mouth (dehydration): Basmati 
rice, barley soup, green lentils, sesame seeds, bilwa, 
kutaj, Ishabgol fried in ghee, and sesame oil/added 
with yogurt and pomegranate, cane sugar, ginger. 

When Kapha is diminished, excessed Vayu 
presents serious problems; therefore, this condition 
must be immediately healed. 


therapies in pahcha karma chapter) if the person is 
strong. After lightening therapy, meals are to include 
barley gruel with bald, shatdvarl, and gokshura. 
Green lentils improve digestion. If diarrhea continues, 
digestives l ik e trikatu, and astringents like comfrey, 
gentian, lotus seeds, red raspberry, and yellow dock 
may be used. 

Thirst: Boiled water with musta and sandal¬ 
wood. 

Dysentery: One takes bilwa, sesame paste, 
yogurt, dmalakl, and ghee. 

Amoebic dysentery: Kutaj along with immune- 
boosting herbs (e.g., guduchl). Shank bhasma (shell 
ash) reduces acid indigestion if present. 


Pitta: Kutaj, chirdyatd, katukd, bilwa, sandalwood, 
lotus seeds, ginger, pomegranate, sesame seeds, 
mango (taken with raw honey), ghee, and rice water. 

If the appetite is good and digestion strong, goats’ 
mi lk will heal Pitta diarrhea. 

If pain recurs after cleansing, oil enemas should 
be administered immediately, using ghee to 1/4 the 
amount of sesame oil, with shatdvarl, bilwa, and milk . 
If diarrhea continues, one receives a massage. Then, 
a pichd basti followed by bath is taken [the soft bark 
of silk cotton tree and pawdar mixed with oil and 
ghee]. Next, persons have meals of boiled milk and 
Pitta-reducing foods. If one eats Pitta-increasing foods 
in this condition, it may lead to bloody diarrhea and 
thirst, pain, burning, and rectal inflammation. Should 
this occur, boiled goats’ mi lk with raw honey and 
cane sugar is ingested and used to wash the anus. 
Foods include boiled rice with this mi lk decoction, 
and ghee. If the person is strong, food (e.g., rice) 
should be eaten after mi lk is digested. Weak persons 
eat food just after the milk . Alternately, fresh butter 
mixed with honey and sugar is eaten before meals. 
The rice is soaked in water overnight, and crushed 
and rubbed the next morning. When the water from 
this rice is drunk, it heals bloody diarrhea. 


Bacillary Dysentery: See therapies for Pitta 
diarrhea. 

Bleeding diarrhea: A diet of shatdvarl or ghee 
cooked with milk (before or after passing stools) heals 
this disorder. Alternately, one may eat sandalwood 
mixed with sugar and honey, followed by rice water. 
For frequent movements with small amounts of blood, 
and associated with pain and Vayu (i.e., difficulty in 
passing stools), pichd basti, or oil enema with ghee 
and the above mentioned herbs. 

Upper/lower channel bleeding: If Pitta-in¬ 
creasing foods are continually eaten, severe rectal 
inflammation can develop, and is fatal. Herbs include 
lotus seeds, durba, and ndgkeshar. 

Chronic diarrhea: This causes a weak anus. 
Frequent, local application of ghee or oil can heal 
this condition. 



Ama: Purgation is advised (i.e., see lightening 


















Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 15: Digestive System 


Inflamed anus: This is caused by frequent 
movements. It is healed either by sprinkling a cold 
decoction of sugar cane, ghee, milk, and raw honey, 
or by applying the mixture as a paste on the 
inflammation. Ghee may also be applied first before 
sprinkling with ghee, neem oil, or sandalwood oil. 


Kapha: Emesis (i.e., lightening therapy) and 
improved digestion are the first concerns. Ginger, 
coriander, bilwa, musta, harltakl, calamus, pippali, 
chitrak, nutmeg, and sour pomegranate are used to 
strengthen the digestion. Later, bald, gokshura, bilwa, 
vidahga, and rock salt are combined with foods and 
drinks to strengthen the constitution. One part yogurt 
mixed with 3 parts water (lassi) also promotes 
digestion. Alternately, either a mixture of pippali with 
honey or a mixture of chitrak with lassi heals this 
condition. 

When dma is digested persons may still suffer from 
diarrhea with small amounts of stool retention, pain, 
mucus, and the urge to pass stool or urine (but cannot). 
Therapy includes radish soup with bdkuchi, yogurt, 
pomegranate, and ghee. (Other diuretic vegetables 
may be used.) 

Should the above condition also have 
complications of passing blood and mucus with thirst, 
boiled milk with ghee, bilwa, or castor oil is used. 

If rectum prolapse with pain exists after ehminating 
dma, first the inner rectum is oiled and fomented to 
soften it. Then herbs are taken including dmalaki, 
ghee, or oil enema (with clashmul and bilwa ), or ghee 
cooked with dry ginger, sour yogurt, triphald, and 
shatdvan. 

Vdyu/Kapha: (or excessive diarrhea caused by 
Kapha or dysentery with pain), pichd basti is applied, 
followed by an enema with pippali, bilwa, calamus, 
and black salt. Afterwards, one bathes, and then one 
eats. In the evening, one receives an oil enema made 
from the same herbs mixed in sesame oil. 

Tricloshic: Herbs from each category are used. If 
all three are equally unbalanced, the order of healing 
is Vayu first, Pitta second, and Kapha third. 
Otherwise, whichever is most unbalanced is treated 
first. 


Fear/Grief: Vayu-reducing therapies, 

psychotherapeutic measures that produce exhilaration 
and consolation. 


Digestive Disorders 
(Grahani) 

[related to duodenum; sprue/malabsorption] 

Normal functioning of the digestive fire (agni) or 
enzymes, is responsible for proper digestion and 
metabolism. The digestive fire resides in the stomach, 
duodenum, small and large intestines, and directly 
affects complexion, strength, weight, immune 
strength, energy, vital breath, and life span. Digested 
food also nourishes the seven tissues (dhatus) and 
fife sap (ojas). Thus, the whole body depends upon 
healthy digestion. Therefore, it is advised to eat fresh, 
organic, wholesome foods and liquids. This is done 
with a peaceful frame of mind, according to one’s 
dosha, the season, time of day, and in proper 
quantities. 

Causes: Chronic diarrhea, ingesting foods and liq¬ 
uids that dampen and deplete the digestive fire (me¬ 
tabolism), fasting, eating before the last meal is di¬ 
gested, eating foods that are too heavy, cold, rough, 
stale, or contaminated. Other causes include misuse 
of pahcha karma, excessive oleation, emaciation, 
suppression of natural urges, and extreme mental 
stress. 

Premonitory Signs: Weakness, taking a long time to 
digest foods, increasing acidity, salivation, bad taste 
in the mouth, loss of taste or appetite, thirst, exhaus¬ 
tion, dizziness, abdominal distention, vomiting, ear 
noise, intestinal gurgling, burning, heaviness. 



Development: When feces are mixed with dma and 
food and are eliminated before, during or after diges¬ 
tion of the food, there may be no elimination at all, or 
elimination may sometimes be solid and sometimes 














The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


liquid; or elimination occurs only after feces accu¬ 
mulate in the colon. This is said to be a serious ill¬ 
ness. This cause of diarrhea differs because of excess 
elimination (with or without ama) only after diges¬ 
tion of food. Four types of gastrointestinal disorders 
exist: Vayu, Pitta, Kapha, and Tridosha. 

Air-Caused (Vdtaia Grahaniroga): Vayu is 
increased by eating foods that are pungent, bitter, and 
astringent; meals that are heavy, rough, or cold; 
fasting, excess travel, suppression of urges, excessive 
sexual intercourse, or extreme mental stress. This 
dampens the digestive fire, making digestion difficult 
or variable. Thus, food becomes fermented and many 
symptoms develop. 

Fire-Caused (Pittaia Grahaniroga): Pitta is 
increased in the digestive tract by excessive eating of 
foods that are pungent, uncooked, sour, alkaline, and 
by foods that cause heartburn. This inactivates the 
gastric enzymes (like pouring hot water over a fire; 
or raises agni so high it bums up nutrients). 

Water-Caused (Kaphaia Grahaniroga): 

Excessive eating of foods that are very difficult to 
digest, fatty, cold; eating before the last meal is 
digested, and sleeping after lunch, cause Kapha 
excesses in digestion. 

Tridosha Grahaniroga: Habits of all three 
doshas create this disorder. 

Symptoms: Emaciation, heat, mouth fumes, 
difficult breathing, fever, fainting, headache, food 
remains stagnant in the stomach, swelling of hands 
and feet. 

Vayu: Palate dryness, difficult breathing, ear pain, 
pressure or noise; constant pain in the ribs, thighs, 
groin, and neck; simultaneous vomiting and diarrhea, 
desire for all tastes, increased hunger and thirst, 
cutting rectal pain, post-digestive gas, eating food 
brings comfort, abdominal tumor, hemorrhoids, 
splenic diseases, anemia, believing one has heart 
disease, difficult elimination occurs after long 
intervals, liquid feces are non-oily, thin, frothy, 
uncooked, cough, non-digesting of foods, headaches, 


fainting, giddiness, stiff back and waist, lower back 
pain, yawning, aches, thirst, fever, vomiting, griping, 
anorexia. 

Hyperacidity causes dryness of throat, mouth, thirst, 
blurred vision, noises, thumping or ringing in the ears, 
pain, emaciation, debility, bad taste in the mouth, 
insatiable appetite for food, cough, difficult breathing. 

Pitta : Food toxins, when mixed with Pitta, cause 
bluish-yellow—or yellow—liquid feces, body odor, 
sour belching, burning sensations in the heart and 
throat areas, loss of taste, appetite, and thirst. 

Kapha: Poor digestion, vomiting, loss of taste and 
appetite, coated mouth, expectoration, cough, nausea, 
nasal mucus, heavy throat and abdomen, belching 
with bad smells and sweetness of taste, debility, loss 
of sexual desire, broken, uncooked, heavy, mucus- 
filled feces; large quantity of feces, weakness, and 
wasting (although persons are not emaciated). 

Tridosha: Symptoms of all doshas are present. 

To restore health, the digestive fire must be 
restored. Digestive illness is one of the 8 diseases 
said to be difficult to heal. The other 7 are diseases of 
the nervous system, urinary stones, leprosy, diabetes, 
enlarged abdomen, hemorrhoids, and fistula 
(abnormal passages from abscesses, cavities or hollow 
organs to the skin or other abscesses, cavities or 
hollow organs). 

Therapies: 

Poor digestion with ama (undigested food toxins): 

Symptoms include distention, salivation, discomfort, 
burning, anorexia, and heaviness. Therapies to 
eliminate these problems include drinking warm 
water or a decoction made of pippali and black 
mustard seeds. [See also p. 391] 

Vayu: Asafoetida. ginger, black pepper, rock 
salt, herbal digestive wines. 

Pitta: Lodhra, amalakl, ncigkeshar, chirciyatci, 
vidahga. 

Kapha: Nutmeg, rock salt, ajwan, pippali. 

Intestinal ama: Purgation and digestive stimulants 
such as castor oil and cardamom, respectively. 




















Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 15: Digestive System 


Rasa and ama: Lightening therapy (i.c., pane ha 
karma, exercise, foods that are light, hot, sharp, and 
dry, carminative/digestive herbs— [e.g., ginger and 
musta, harltaki and ginger, drunk with hot water]). 

After the stomach is cleansed, persons eat light 
foods such as thin gruel and kichan, followed by 
digestive stimulant herbs. 

When the digestive fire begins to become 
stronger, but stool, urine, and gas retention continue, 
persons should be given oil massage and fomentation 
for 2 or 3 days, then followed by a non-oily enema. 

After Vayu is balanced and the toxins are loose, 
one takes castor oil purgation (2 tsp. in a cup of hot 
water before bed). 

Should there be constipation, an oil enema is 
administered, along with digestive stimulants, sour 
herbs like dmalaki, and sour pomegranate, and other 
Vayu-reducing herbs (i.e., cardamom, ginger, bald). 

Vayu: When ama is completely removed, one 
takes ghee with digestive stimulant herbs. Herbs l ik e 
dashmul, ginger, pippali, triphald, trikatu, and chitrak 
reduce Vayu and promote digestion. Black salt is also 
helpful. They are taken with warm water and also 
used for massage. One-half cup yogurt and 1/2 cup 
water (lassi) taken after meals also improves 
digestion. 

Pitta : This dosha is reduced by purgation or 
emesis. Afterwards, the digestive fire is stimulated 
by eating light, bitter, astringent, cool, and moist 
foods; cool liquids, ghee, and sour pomegranates. 
Herbs include sandalwood, musta, neem, ginger, 
mahjishthd, katukd, kutaj, and bilwa. Trikatu may also 
be taken for Pitta digestive problems, though its nature 
is heating. One-half cup yogurt and 1/2 cup water 
(lassi) taken after meals also improves digestion. 
Pungent and sour foods and black salt may be taken 
only when mixed with bitter and astringent foods. 
Cane sugar or rock sugar is also useful when mixed 
with the herbs. 

Kapha: Pungent, hot, digestive, and bitter herbs 
include viclahga, chitrak, mahjishthd, cardamom, 
turmeric, pippali, trikatu, triphald, musta, calamus, 
guduchi, and neem. Kapha-reducing foods are taken 
as well, including barley. 


Abdominal Diseases (Udara Roga) 

Causes: All diseases, especially udara roga, are 
caused by deranged waste material in the body 
(malas —feces, urine, and sweat, and the three 
doshas), caused by poor digestion and metabolism. 
The main cause of abdominal disorders is constipa¬ 
tion. Other causes include indigestion, contami¬ 
nated food, and accumulation of doshas and wastes 
(malas). 

When the digestive fire is weak and persons eat 
foods that are difficult to digest, indigestion develops. 
Other causes include unhealthy or unnatural habits 
l ik e forcing the passing of stool. The result is an 
accumulation of the doshas that vitiates the Prana 
Vayu, Agni, and Apdna Vayu. The excess of air 
obstructs the air circulating upward and downward. 
These excessed doshas become lodged between the 
s ki n and the muscle tissues. This causes abdominal 
distention, leading to all abdominal diseases, 
including the accumulation of fluid in the peritoneal 
cavity of the abdomen (ascites). This is caused by 
the simultaneous vitiation of all three doshas. 

Different types of these diseases are caused by 
various situations, eating overly hot, salty, alkaline 
(laxatives), sour, and poisonous foods and liquids, 
and improper administration of paheha karma. Other 
causes include improper food, liquids, and habits after 
pahclra karma; eating very dry, spoiled, or mutually 
adverse foods (e.g., fish and milk, milk and salt, hot 
and cold water). Further causes are emaciation from 
splenic diseases, hemorrhoids, and sprue 
(malabsorption, anemia, and gastrointestinal 
disorders). 












The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Ignoring diseases by continually eating and 
drinking harmful food and liquids, and suppressing 
the natural urges will also cause abdominal disorders. 
Weakening of the channels of circulation, allowing 
undigested food toxins to remain in the body, and 
over-nourishment can also cause abdominal disorders. 
Other causes include the consumption of foods and 
liquids that irritate the mind and body; obstructions 
caused by hemorrhoids, hair, and hard stools; 
intestinal ulcerations or perforations; and excessive 
aggravation of the doshas. These are all related to 
excess Kapha and Vayu; a deficiency of Pitta the and 
digestive fire. 

Eight forms of abdominal distention exist: Vayu, 
Pitta, Kapha, Tridoshic, enlarged spleen (and liver); 
rectum, intestines, and ascites (peritoneal). 

Premonitory Signs: Loss of hunger, extended 
digestion time with burning, inability to tell whether 
food is digested (excess Vayu), steady loss of strength, 
breathlessness after mild activity, increase of feces 
quantity but difficult elimination, slight leg and foot 
swelling, joint pain on the sides of the urinary bladder, 
distention with bursting pain (even with small 
quantities of easily digestible foods), with abdominal 
line marks and loss of abdominal folds. One may 
experience difficulty digesting sweet, oily, and heavy 
foods and liquids, indigestion arising from all foods 
and liquids, constant loss of strength, shortness of 
breath upon mild exertion, constipation due to dry 
foods and Udana Vayu (excess upward moving air), 
distention and pain in the lower belly, protruding vein 
networks, no folds in the abdomen. 

Development: The three doshas, becoming 
aggravated, obstruct both the top and bottom channels 
of water metabolism, blocking the channels that carry 
sweat and water (Svedhana and udakavaha srotas), 
and create abnormalities of outward and downward 
moving airs (Prana and Apana Vayus) and the 
metabolism (agni). This causes water to accumulate 
between the skin, muscles, and joints, thus enlarging 
the abdomen. This causes abdominal disorders of a 
Vayu, Pitta, Kapha, or Tridoshic nature (the first four 
of the eight forms of udara roga). 

There are eight types: Vayu, Pitta, Kapha, 
Tridosha, and those caused by enlarged spleen (or 


liver), intestinal obstruction, intestinal perforation, and 
fluid accumulation. Persons with this disease have 
dry palates and lips; swollen feet, hands and abdomen; 
inactivity, loss of strength and desire for food, 
emaciation, severe gas, and a deathly appearance. 

Vayu: Because of excess dry foods, insufficient 
water, exertion, suppression of the natural urges, 
upward movement of air, emaciation and fasting, 
excess Vayu results. This excess moves through the 
abdominal sides, cardiac region, urinary bladder, and 
anus, weakening the digestion, and thereby increasing 
Kapha (due to undigested foods). Kapha then blocks 
the movement of Vayu that then becomes stuck 
between the abdominal skin and muscle tissues, and 
causes swelling. Thus, Vayu is the main dosha 
responsible for poor digestion, while Kapha is a 
secondary factor. 

Pitta : Caused by pungent, sour, salty, very hot and 
sharp foods, exposure to heat (fire and sun), eating 
foods that cause a burning sensation, and eating before 
the last meal is digested. When the excessed Pitta 
flows to locations of Vayu and Kapha, it blocks them. 
Pitta then moves upwards to weaken the digestive 
fire. 

Kapha: Due to a lack of exercise, taking naps, 
eating excess sweet and oily foods, eating yogurt, 
milk, meat, and living in marshy places. Thus, Kapha 
becomes excessed and blocks the circulatory 
channels, obstructing Vayu in the outer intestines. 
Vayu then puts pressure on Kapha, causing Kapha 
types of abdominal diseases. 

Tridoshic: All three doshas simultaneously 
become excessed when a person with poor digestion 
eats unwholesome, raw, heavy, or mutually adverse 
foods. As a result, the three doshas slowly accumulate 
in the alimentary tract viscera, causing abdominal 
diseases. 

Enlarged Spleen and Liver (Pllho-yakrddalu- 

dara): Enlarged or displaced spleen is caused by 
overly irritating food, excess travel, strenuous exer¬ 
cise, lifting heavy objects, or walking long distance, 
overindulging in sexual activity, emaciation due to 













Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 15: Digestive System 


excess vomiting therapies, chronic illness, or excess 
blood (either due to an excess quantity of blood, fat, 
or muscle tissue). The spleen hardens as it becomes 
enlarged. When ignored, the spleen puts pressure on 
the abdomen and pancreas, causing this disorder. Five 
varieties of pllho dara exist: Vayu, Pitta, Kapha, 
Tridoshic, and blood. The enlarged liver is identical 
to the spleen; however, it happens only on the right 
side of the abdomen. 

Intestinal Obstruction (Baddha-gudo-dara): 

This is caused by Vayu (as ruler of the rectum) 
becoming excessed from obstructions due to small 
hairs (e.g., eyelashes) in food, upward moving air in 
the abdomen, hemorrhoids, intestinal intrusion into 
its passage (lumen), and gas (obstructed Apcina Vayu). 
This excessed Vayu weakens digestive and metabolic 
enzyme power, obstructing the movement of feces, 
Pitta, and Kapha, and causes this disease. 

Intestinal Perforation (Chidro dara): Caused by 
sand, grass, splinters, bones, or nails in food, deep 
yawns, or overeating. This intestinal wound begins 
to ooze and the food juices reach the exterior of the 
intestine. The rectum and intestine become fil led with 
this liquid, which causes acute abdominal swelling. 

Ascites (Udako dara): (Fluid accumulation in 
abdominal peritoneal cavity) Poor digestion develops 
from drinking excess water after oleation therapy, 
being emaciated by weak digestion, or worsening 
digestion caused by drinking excess water. From this, 
Vayu within the lower left stomach and the duodenum 
(kloman ) becomes blocked by Kapha. Also, the water 
circulatory channel (udakavaha srota ) increases its 
water supply that obstructs the circulatory channels. 
Deranged Vayu and Kapha further increase this water, 
causing ascites. 

Symptoms: 

General: Sides of the abdomen are distended, 

gurgling noises, leg and hand edema, poor digestion, 
smooth chin, and emaciation. One may experience 
stupor, debility, accumulation of feces, urine, and 
sweat (especially feces); poor digestion, burning, 


swelling, gas, and abdominal fluid during the most 
serious stages. 

There is slight red color with veins appearing, gas 
and sounds, obstmctions arising and subsiding in the 
navel region and intestines, pain in the heart, waist, 
navel, rectum and groin, expelling loud sounding gas, 
obstructed feces, insufficient urine. 

Vayu causes upward-moving air, pain, and gas. Pitta 
causes delusion, thirst, burning, and fever. Kapha 
causes heaviness, loss of taste and appetite, and 
abdominal hardness. The liver, situated on the right 
side, when enlarged and displaced, causes abdominal 
swelling similar to the spleen. 

Vayu: Swelling of hands and feet, scrotum, and 
pain in the central and upper abdomen, ribs, waist, 
legs, scrotum, and back. One may feel cutting pain in 
the joints, dry cough, body ache, heaviness of the 
lower body, waste accumulation, grayish or reddish 
skin, nails, eyes, urine, and feces; occasional increase 
and decrease of the abdomen, pricking and piercing 
pain, thick, black abdominal veins, hollow sounding 
abdomen (when tapped), gas moves all around the 
abdomen with pain and noise. Other symptoms 
include abdominal cracks, colic pain in the sides of 
the abdomen and chest, upward moving abdominal 
air, general weakness, emaciation, weakness, 
anorexia, indigestion, cracking pain in the lingers, 
lower abdominal heaviness, constipation, unable to 
pass gas or urine, Vayu moving up, down, and 
sideways with colic pain and noise. 

Pitta: Fever, fainting, burning, thirst, bitter taste, 
dizziness, diarrhea, yellow or greenish complexion, 
nails, eyes, urine, and feces; abdominally veins of 
yellow, blue, green, or coppery-red color; perspiration, 
heat, soft to the touch, quickly collects fluid. One 
may experience giddiness, pungent taste, sense of 
pain, smoke rising, and stic ki ness. These symptoms 
may indicate the development of ascites ( udako dara). 












The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Kapha: Physical debility, loss of the sensation of 
touch, swelling, heaviness, excess sleep, nausea, loss 
of taste and appetite, difficult breathing, cough, white 
complexion, eyes, nails, feces, and urine, smooth, 
unmoving abdomen with a whitish vein network, 
slowly increasing over time, becoming hard, cold, 
and heavy. One may also develop anorexia, indiges¬ 
tion, general weakness, numbness, hand, leg, thigh, 
and scrotal swellings, hard and heavy abdomen. 

Tridoshic: Appearance of the signs of each dosha 
listed above; nails, complexion, eyes, urine, and stool 
become afflicted with all the colors mentioned for 
each dosha; a vein network with the colors of the 
doshas described above. Other symptoms include 
ingesting menstrual blood, wastes, etc., poisons. 
When doshas mixed with blood become aggravated 
and localized in the abdomen, it creates emaciation, 
fainting, dizziness, and produce an enlarged abdomen, 
symptoms of all the doshas, and quickly developing 
fluid. This is a serious condition, most troubling 
during cold, windy, and cloudy days. 

Spleen /Liver (Pllho-yakrddalu dara ): The spleen 
is displaced from the left side and becomes enlarged 
from habitually eating excessive amounts of food, 
exhaustion, excess travel, sex, exercise, heavy work, 
walking, vomiting, weakness due to diseases, 
increased blood, plasma, and other tissues. The 
enlarged spleen becomes hard l ik e a stone, then as it 
increases, resembles a tortoise shell. This covers the 
whole abdomen, along with difficult breathing, cough, 
severe thirst, bad taste in mouth, pain, fever, yellowish- 
white complexion, fainting, vomiting, burning, 
delusion, slightly red or discolored, with blue or deep 
yellow lines. Other symptoms include weakness, 
anorexia, indigestion, constipation, urine and 
abdominal gas retention, fainting, thirst, vomiting, 
prostration, poor digestion, emaciation, finger joint 
or colic pain, alimentary tract distention caused by 
air, reddish or discolored abdomen, green, yellow, or 
blue vein network. The same symptoms develop for 
the liver as for the spleen. 

Intestinal Obstruction (Baddha-gudo dara): 
Thirst, dry mouth and palate, burning sensation, fe¬ 


ver, exhaustion in the thighs, cough, difficult breath¬ 
ing, weakness, anorexia, indigestion, constipation, not 
passing urine, abdominal distention, vomiting, sneez¬ 
ing, headache, colic pain in the heart, umbilical re¬ 
gion, and anus, no peristaltic movement in the abdo¬ 
men, reddish-blue vein network or a knotty vein net¬ 
work, elongated abdominal swellings looking l ik e a 
cow’s tail. 

Intestinal Perforation (Chido dara): Eating bones 
or other sharp things can puncture or ulcerate the 
intestines. The undigested food flows out through that 
hole or ulcer in small quantities, collects in the rectum, 
gets mixed with feces, becomes foul smelling, slimy, 
yellowish-red, and gradually fills and enlarges the 
lower abdomen. Then fluid fills the abdomen, 
manifesting symptoms of the respective doshas, and 
being associated with difficult breathing, thirst, and 
dizziness. 

Ascites (Udako dara): No appetite, thirst, colic pain, 
difficult breathing, cough, discharge from the anus, 
general debility, a multicolored vein network on the 
abdomen, hollow sounding abdomen (upon tapping). 

Overall, this is considered a difficult disease to 
heal; therefore, before any water accumulates in the 
abdomen, the condition should be immediately 
attended to. If water is allowed to accumulate, the 
deranged doshas become displaced and liquefied. 
This will cause stic ki ness in the joints and circulatory 
channels, and divert sweat away from the external 
channels (moving the sweat sideways). This sideways 
movement further adds to the accumulated abdominal 
water. The sticky fluid makes the abdomen round, 
heavy, and numb; the sides of the abdomen become 
excessively enlarged. The vein networks then 
disappear and the navel area is mainly afflicted. Then 
the disease spreads to the rest of the abdomen and 
water begins to accumulate therein. 

If the condition is still not corrected, persons 
experience complications of vomiting, diarrhea, 
tamaka (bronchial) asthma, thirst, and difficult 
breathing. Other complications include pain in the 
sides of the chest, hoarseness, anorexia, and 
suppression of urine. At this point, the disease can 
only be controlled but no longer healed unless strong 
medicines (i.e., with poisonous properties) are 











Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 15: Digestive System 


prescribed or surgery is performed. 

After 14 to 15 days without treatment, abdominal 
swelling (baddha-gudo dam) cannot be healed (but 
can still be controlled). Ascites with water in the 
abdomen, and acute abdominal swelling due to 
intestinal perforation ( chidro dam ) can only be healed 
by poisonous medicines or surgery. 

Although some illnesses are generally curable, 
there may be other complications that allow these 
il lnesses to be controlled but not completely cured. 
Complications include swollen eyes, curved genitalia, 
sticky and thin skin, weakened strength, blood, 
muscle, and digestion. 

Symptoms of swelling of the heart, difficult 
breathing, hiccup, anorexia, thirst, fainting, vomiting, 
and diarrhea are the most life-threatening 
complications. 

Abdominal diseases may also exist without the 
accumulation of water (ajatodaka). Its symptoms 
include almost no swelling (in the abdomen or legs), 
reddish abdomen, hollow sound upon tapping, not 
very heavy, gurgling sounds are always present. 
Persons may experiences a vein network covering 
the abdomen, gas will move from the rectum to the 
navel, distending the navel area (distention releases 
after passing stool and gas). Other symptoms include 
colic pain around the heart, navel, groin, lumbar, and 
anus; forceful elimination of gas, moderate digestion. 
Excessive salivation causes a lack of taste in the 
mouth, scanty urine, and hard stools. 

Therapies: 

These diseases are the most difficult to heal unless 
the diseases are detected in early stages, there is no 
fluid, and the diseased person is still strong. 

Therapy is suggested when there is no abdominal 
swelling, reddish, hollow sounding (upon tapping), 
not very heavy, and continual gurgling sounds. Other 
symptoms that require therapy include many vein 
networks, a distended navel (that subsides after 
passing the gas), pain in the heart, groin, waist, navel, 
and anus. Further symptoms include passing hard gas, 
moderate to strong digestion, mouth salivation 
causing tastelessness, scanty urine, or hard stools. All 
these signs indicate symptoms without fluid; they may 
undergo therapy for healing. 


Persons having swollen eyes, crooked genitals, 
moist and thick skin, lack of strength, blood, digestion, 
and suffering from emaciation should not undergo 
therapy. Abdominal disorders, with complications of 
swollen vital organs, difficult breathing, hiccup, 
anorexia, thirst, fainting, vomiting, and diarrhea are 
considered fatal. 

General: Since this i ll ness is mostly caused by 
the contribution of all the doshas, therapies to alleviate 
all three doshas are used. Appetizing, light foods (e.g., 
basmati rice, barley, green lentils, mungdal, barley 
gruel, vegetables). 

Herbs include pippali, hantaki, ginger, chitrak, 
and vidahga with cane sugar, rock salt, and ghee. The 
watery residue of yogurt (whey— muttadh/takra) is 
useful in all abdominal diseases. Persons should avoid 
animal products (especially fish), sesame seeds, 
pastries, foods that are hot, salty, sour, burning, and 
heavy; water, physical exercise, long walks, naps, long 
journeys. 

Vayu: When persons are strong, they first undergo 
oil massage and fomentation, followed by castor oil 
purgation. Once the dosha is balanced and the 
abdomen no loner distended, a cloth bandage is 
wrapped around the abdomen to prevent Vayu from 
distending it again; the cloth compresses space that 
can cause a pocket of gas. Purgation is done daily to 
remove accumulated doshas obstructing the digestive 
channels. After passing stool, one eats a Vayu- 
reducing diet and drinks boiled mi lk (before meals 
or after food is digested) to develop strength. Once 
strong, the person gradually reduces intake of mi lk 
to prevent nausea. 

If upward movement of Vayu (Udanal reverse 
peristalsis) occurs, the digestive fire is strengthened 
by vegetable soups with a bit of sour and salty tastes 
to it. Later, oil massage, fomentation, and dry enemas 
are given. Oil enemas are used for twitching, 
convulsions, pain in the joints, in cases of twichings, 
convulsions, pain in joints, bones, sides, back, and 
sacrum. This enema is also useful for persons 
suffering from stool and gas retention, or for the strong 
person. 

If persons are weak, old, or very young, or with 
only a slight increase of Vayu, the only therapy 








The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


suggested is pacification. Persons need a mild Vayu- 
reducing diet. Examples include ghee, vegetables, 
soup, rice, boiled mi lk (alone), dry or oil enema, mild 
massage, yogurt/water drink (1:1) with pippall, and 
black salt. 

Non-oily enemas use dashmul with rhubarb or 
other strong purgatives, while oil enemas include 
castor or sesame oil cooked with Vayu-reducing herbs 
(e.g., triphald, cardamom), and sour herbs like 
amalaki. 

Vdyu: With side pain, stiffness, and constricted heart 
area, herbs include bilwa and bald. Oil laxatives like 
castor oil are useful. Afterwards, trikatu, dashmul, or 
hihg is taken. 

Pitta : Strong persons use purgatives from the 
beginning of therapy, while weak persons are first 
cleansed by oil enemas, and then by milk enemas. 
When their physical and digestive strength returns, 
they receive an oil massage, followed by purgation 
with boiled milk and castor oil, yogurt/water (1:1) 
drink with cane sugar. 

Kapha: First oil massage, then fomentation 
followed by evacuation through fomentation, sweat, 
and laxatives. After that, one takes Kapha-reducing 
foods, liquids, and herbs for pacification, 3/4 warm 
water with 1/4 fat-free yogurt (lassi) with trikatu. 

KaphaP/dvu: Ghee and sesame oil with ginger 
and pippall. 

Tridosha: The therapies used depend upon the 
most vitiated doshas. One quarter fat-free yogurt with 
3/4 water (lassi), mixed with cane sugar, trikatu, and 
rock salt. 

Enlarged Liver and Spleen: Aloe gel, chirdyatd 
(or gentian), saffron (or safflower), punarnavd, 
bhudmalaki, and bhrihgardj with ghee. Light foods 
and vegetables are also eaten. Vayu or Kapha forms 
may require cauterization. Pitta excesses require milk 
enemas, drinking boiled milk and bloodletting. 
Yogurt/water with honey, sesame oil, calamus, and 
ginger are other therapies. 


Cirrhosis—bhringarai is the best herb; other 
herbs for enlarged liver. 

Infected Hepatitis — guduchl, suclarshan, iron 
supplements; and enlarged liver herbs; nila (isatis )— 
antibiotic. 

Chronic Liver Complaints —aloe gel, guduchl 
extract, amalaki, shatdvarl; olive, sesame, and 
avocado oils rebuild the liver. 

Intestinal Obstruction: Fomentation followed by 
non-oily and oil enemas, irritant herbs (e.g., chitrak, 
pepper, ginger, harltakl), oil, and salt. Rhubarb, castor 
oil, or senna purge the system, healing reverse 
peristalsis and Vayu. Yogurt water with rock salt and 
pippall is also helpful. Boiled milk with ginger, 
vidahga, chitrak, or trikatu is another useful remedy. 

Intestinal Perforation: Kapha therapy is used 
(except for fomentation), and includes yogurt/water 
with pippall and raw honey. If thirst, cough, fever, 
loss of weight (deteriorated in flesh), poor digestion, 
lack of hunger, difficult breathing, colic, or weakened 
senses exist, therapies cannot help the condition. 
[When the digestive fire (pachak agni) is reduced, 
food is not digested or absorbed. Thus, persons do 
not gain weight. Hot spices increase the digestive fire.] 

Ascites: Kapha-reducing foods and few liquids. 
Herbs include trikatu, calamus, triphald, and chitrak. 
Yogurt/water with raw honey and sesame oil are other 
useful therapies. 

Complications: With edema, hard bowels, colic 
thirst, or fainting, herbs are used for debilitation after 
passing stools. Boiled milk is also helpful. 
Ashwagandha with ghee is spread on the abdomen, 
and water (with punarnavd, calamus, ginger, and 
coriander) is sprinkled over it (this herbal mixture is 
also ingested). 

Vdyu with edema, distention, tumors and 

hemorrhoids: Pippall, chitrak, ginger, and dashmul. 




















Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 15: Digestive System 


Jaundice (Kamala Roga) 

Causes: Jaundice can develop either from anemia, or 
on its own. When it arises from anemia, it is caused 
by aggravated Pitta (from Pitta-in-creasing foods and 
lifestyle). The excessed Pitta then bums up the blood 
and muscles, producing jaundice in the alimentary 
tract (g.i.t.). The excessed dosha then travels through 
the transportation channels (srotas) and produces 
jaundice in the different tissues. Its symptoms include 
deep yellow eyes, urine, skin, nails, mouth, and fe¬ 
ces; burning, indigestion, thirst, greenish-brown com¬ 
plexion, and weakness of the sense organs. 

When Vayu and Pitta are excessed, there is 
greenish-bluish-yellow complexion with dizziness, 
no sexual desire, mild fever, stupor, physical 
weakness, and poor digestion. 

Jaundice can occur simply from ignoring an 
aggravated Pitta condition. This leads to jaundice with 
edema and is hard to cure. Edema is the major 
secondary complication of anemia and jaundice. 

Therapies: First, oil massage, then mild emesis and 
purgation with bitter herbs. Foods include basmati 
rice, barley, whole wheat, soups, peas, lentils, and 
oils that reduce Pitta; white radish, yellow squash, 
green leafy vegetables, chlorophyll, dandelion, and 
sugar cane. The best herbs include bhudmalakl, 
guduchl, and sudarshan chuma (will aggravate Vayu 
symptoms). Other herbs include triphald, neem, bald, 
bhrihgardj, bdwa, sandalwood, lemon grass, katukd, 
barberry, vidari kand, dmalakl, gotu kola, aloe gel, 
turmeric, barberry, trikatu, dry ginger with boiled 
milk, cane sugar, and ghee. 


Gallstones 

Causes: Congestion obstructs the bile flow and 
inflames the gallbladder wall. 


fever. 

Pitta : Stones are yellow, red, or green with 
sharp angles, painful and inflamed. 

Kapha : Soft, round, whitish stones, rarely 
painful. 

Therapies: 

Purgation with aloe or rhubarb (mixed with 
fennel) is required in acute conditions. Bhu-dmalaki, 
turmeric, and mahjishthd are next used to cleanse the 
liver and blood. 

Certain herbs break up stones. These include 
gokshura, katukd, and pashana bedha. Taken with 
coriander or turmeric, the herb’s actions are directed 
to the gall bladder. 


Dyspepsia (Mandagnl) 

Four kinds of gastric fire or digestive activity 
(jathardgni) exist: Vishamdgni (Vayu-caused), 
tlkshna (Pitta-caused), mandagni (Kapha-caused), 
and samandgni (normal digestion). Vishamdgni is 
variable digestion. Tlkshndgni digests normal and 
excess quantities of food too quickly. Mandagni 
cannot digest any food. Samandgni digests normal 
quantities of food without causing any difficulties; 
this is the ideal state of digestion. 


Indigestion (Ajlrna) 

Three kinds of indigestion exist: Ama (Kapha- 
caused), vidaghda (Pitta-caused), and vishtabdha 
(Vayu-caused). [Some authorities suggest three other 
forms of indigestion: Rasaesha (indigestion of 
nutrients), dinapaka (food is digested the next day 
but without causing difficulty), and prativdsara 
(indigestion immediately after eating each meal). 


Symptoms: 

General : Symptoms include acute pain in the 


fiver and gallbladder, swelling, and tenderness. 

Vayu : Stones are black or brown, dry or rough; 
they cause severe pain but mild inflammation and 

















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Causes: 

Drinking large quantities of water, eating insuf¬ 
ficient or excess amounts of food at unusual times, 
eating unwholesome foods, suppression of natural 
urges, insomnia, and daytime naps. Mental causes 
include eating when angry, jealous, anxious, worried, 
frightened, grieving, miserable, or in pain. 

Symptoms: 

General: Weakness without exertion, heaviness 
of the body, not eliminating gas and stool, giddiness, 
constipation, or diarrhea. 

Vayu: Abdominal pain or distention, gas retention, 
delusion, and other Vayu symptoms. 

Pitta: Giddiness, thirst, fainting, sour and hot 
belchings, sweating, burning sensations (e.g., 
heartburn), and other Pitta symptoms. 

Kapha: Abdominal and body heaviness, nausea, 
belching, swelling of the cheeks and eyes. 

Nutrition: Aversion to food, abdominal heaviness, 
extreme belchings. Pain develops whereever dma 
resides in the body. Many diseases can develop 
because closhas travel in the body with dma. 

Indigestion is the cause of many diseases. When 
it is healed, other diseases are healed automatically. 

Complications: 

Indigestion can lead to fainting, delirium, vom¬ 
iting, excessive salivation, debility, giddiness, and 
even death. Insomnia, restlessness, tremors, suppres¬ 
sion of urine, and fainting are the five most troubling 
complications. (Indigestion can cause three other dis¬ 
eases, visuchika, alasaka, mdvilambikd —see below). 

Healthy Digestion: 

Symptoms include belchings without bad smell 
or taste, enthusiasm, proper elimination of gas, stool, 
and urine; lightness of the body, natural hunger and 
thirst. 

Therapies: 

Vayu : Moist heat (fomentation). Herbal 
combinations include triphald, yogaraj guggul, 
hingwastak churna, sitopalddi, churna, lashunadi 
vati, and lavana bhdskar. Other useful herbs include 
asafoetida, ginger, cumin, and rock salt. 


Pitta : Velamina (vomiting with warm salt water). 
Drinking cold water helps reduce acidic digestion. 
Harltakl and raw honey can be licked, or harltakl 
and drdksha ingested. Aloe vera, musta, chirdyatd, 
and mahasudarshan churna. 

Kapha : Fasting until one feels better. The same 
therapies as Vayu, plus black pepper, chitrak, and 
trikatu (i.e., hotter spices quickly raise the digestive 
fire). 

Nutrition : Rest in bed, dry heat (fomentation); 
harltakl, and dry ginger. Cardamom, coriander, 
turmeric, and fennel can be taken with meals daily to 
maintain health and prevent indigestion. 


Visuchika (Gastro Enteritis) 

Symptoms: When persons suffer from indigestion, 
mad food cravings, careless eating habits, and 
overeating, they may experience pricking pain (as if 
needles are sticking them). Other symptoms include 
fainting, diarrhea, vomiting, severe thirst, burning 
sensations all over, poor complexion, tremors, pain 
in the heart area and head, and twisting of the arms 
and legs. (Therapies below) 

Alasaka 

Symptoms: Severe abdominal distention, delusion, 
crying helplessly, upward-moving gas (i.e., blocked 
downward movement of the gas), not eliminating gas 
and stool; thirst, belching. (Therapies below) 

Vilambika 

Excess Kapha and Vayu remains in the body and 
cannot be expelled. This condition is very difficult to 
heal or cannot be healed. 

















Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 15: Digestive System 


Therapies: 

If these 3 conditions can be healed, therapies 
include dry heat (fomentation), strong emetics and 
purgatives, fasting, bathing, or sprinkling emetic or 
purgative decoction water, and non-oily enemas. 
Herbs include vachd, king, or ativishd with tepid 
water. Rock salt, ghee, triphald, pippali, and trikcitu 
are also useful. A mixture of pippali and ginger in 
hot water is also effective. 

Peyci (thin gruel), digestive and appetizing herbs 
(e.g., cardamom, cumin, coriander, fennel, etc.) are 
taken when hunger returns. 


Anaha 

This condition occurs when dma and/or feces 
accumulate in the digestive tract, obstructing normal 
movement. Accumulated dma produces thirst, runny 
nose, burning sensation in the head, stomach pain 
and heaviness, heart pain, stiff joints in the back and 
waist, obstructed feces and urine, fainting, vomiting 
of feces, difficult breathing, and other symptoms of 
alasaka (see above). 


bitter items), overeating, injury, sprouted grains, 
incompatible foods (e.g., hot and cold items at the 
same meal), stale foods, suppression of natural urges, 
fasting, excessive laughing, or talking. 

Pitta : Excessive intake of hot, pungent, sour, 
irritating, and fermented foods and liquids; anger, 
overheating, fatigue, overexposure to the sun, and 
sexual intercourse. 

Kapha : Excessive intake of animal products, fatty 
substances, diary, sugar, nuts, and other Kapha- 
increasing items and habits. 

Tridosha : Indulging in habits of each of the 
three doshas causes tridoshic colic. 

Symptoms: 

Vavu : Pain in the heart, ribs, back, waist, and 
urinary bladder. The pain (pricking and tearing) 
becomes worse during or after digestion, in the 
evenings, in cloudy or cold weather. Other symptoms 
include gas, distention, insomnia, variable appetite, 
nervousness, and palpitations. 


Therapies: 

When dma obstructs the digestive tract 

1) First, emetics are administered, then digestive 
herbs and foods. 

2) If vomiting of feces does not occur, the body re¬ 
ceives dry heat fomentation and digestive herbs are 
taken. 

3) Purgative herb powders can be blown into the 
intestines with a tube (through the rectum). 

4) Purgative herbal past suppositories (vartis) are 
then used. 

5) Persons can take emetic or purgative decoctions. 

6) Once dma is removed, non-oily enemas are used 
(purgative herbs, honey, and rock salt). 7) If 
needed, an oil enema can also be used. 


Pitta : Thirst, delusion, burning sensation near the 
navel, hyperacidity, heartburn, diarrhea, perspiration, 
irritability, fainting, and giddiness. Colic becomes 
more painful around noon and midnight during 
digestion and in rainy weather. Colic is relieved during 
cold weather and by eating and drinking sweet and 
cold items. 

Kapha : Nausea, cough, debility, anorexia, salivation, 
stomach pain, white or clear phlegm, congestion, 
vomiting, feeling full after eating. These symptoms 
are worse at sunrise and in the spring and fall seasons. 

Tridosha : Severe symptoms of all three doshas 
appear throughout the day and are difficult to heal. 
Practitioners do not attempt to heal incurrable cases. 


Colic (Shula) 

Causes: 

Vavu : Excessive exercise, travel, or sexual 
intercourse; not sleeping at night, drinking very cold 
water, eating very dry foods (i.e., dry, astringent, and 


Therapies: 

General : Since Vayu is the underlying cause of 
colic, air-reducing therapies are advised: fomentation 
(moist heat application), oil abhyahga, and ghee. 





















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Herbs include cardamom, ginger, and fennel for 
abdominal pain, dispelling gas, and digesting food 
and cimci. Hirig, nutmeg, chamomile, and jatamanshi 
relieve colic pain. Light, simple meals are advised. 

Vayu : Herbs include rock salt, vidariga, chitrak, 
pippali, hirig, lavan bhaskar churna, and draksha 
(medicated grape wine). Small, light, and warm Vayu- 
reducing foods and liquids are taken. An anti-araa 
diet is also useful for a few days. 

Pitta : First, one drinks cold water and induces 
vomiting. Thereafter, cool foods, liquids, and life¬ 
styles are advised (i.e., Pitta-reducing). Bitter herbs 
such as chirdyata and katukd are suggested. 
Carminative herbs like fennel, mint, coriander, cumin, 
and saffron are also helpful. Avipattikar churna with 
a little dry ginger is another useful mixture. 

Kapha : This condition requires drinking an 
emetic decoction followed by vomiting. Dry 
fomentation (heat application) and heating herbs (e.g., 
pippali, dry ginger, vachd, trikatu, chitrak) are used, 
as well as the Vayu-reducing therapies discussed 
above. 

Tridosha : The above therapies used depend 
upon the predominant symptoms. 


Kukshi-shiila 

Causes. Development, and Symptoms: 

Excess Vayu affects digestion, and when located 
in the hips and abdomen, interferes with previously 
eaten meals. Thus, all foods remain undigested. 
Symptoms include heavy breathing due to 
accumulated feces. This causes the person to toss in 
agony, and to find no relief in any position or posture. 
This condition is caused by excess Vayu. 

Therapies: 

Vomiting and fasting are advised if persons are 
strong. Acidic and appetizing herbs are taken to reduce 
Vayu and dma. Dry ginger, hirig, brihatl, kantkdri, 
vachd, kushtd, ativishd, and kataj are recommended. 
Purgatives, non-oily and oily enemas can reduce 
accumulated excesses. Oil abhyariga and sweating 
(hot poultices) are useful, as are fermented rice 
washes. 


Cardiac Colic (Hirchula) 

Causes. Development, and Symptoms: 

Weakened plasma (rasa) causes excess Vayu 
(which acts with Pitta and Kapha) in the heart area. 
This results in colic pain in the heart region. 
Symptoms include difficult breathing. The condition 
is caused by excess rasa and Vayu. 


Parshva-shOla 

Causes. Development and Symptoms: 

Excess Kapha in the sides of the body blocks Vayu, 
causing abdominal distention and intestinal rumbling. 
Persons experience pricking pain in the ribs, heart, 
and bladder; insomnia, no appetite, difficult and 
painful breathing. This condition is caused by excess 
Vayu and Kapha. 

Therapies: 

Hirig, rock salt, and tumburu are taken in a barley 
decoction. Castor oil and clrdkshd (medicated grape 
wine) are also effective. 


Therapies: 

Heart disease therapies are used (see Chapter 
14), as well as those mentioned above for Vayu. 


Bladder Colic (Basti-shula) 

Vayu becomes excessed in the bladder because 
of suppression of urine and feces, causing pain in the 
bladder, groin, and navel. This causes further 
suppression of urine, stool, and gas. It is caused by 
excess Vayu. Vayu-reducing therapies mentioned 
above are used. 


Urinary Colic (Mutra-shula) 

Excess Vayu causes piercing pain in the genitals, 















Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 15: Digestive System 


intestines, hips, lower abdomen, and navel areas. This 
pain prevents the release of urine. Vayu-reducing 
therapies are used. 


Abdominal Colic (Vit-shOla) 

Vayu becomes excessed when dry foods are eaten, 
weakening the digestive fire and preventing stool 
evacuation. This causes excruciating pain in the lower 
abdominal area. Pain begins on the right or left side, 
then eventually spreads to the whole abdomen. Other 
symptoms include mmbling sounds, unquenchable 
thirst, vertigo, and are followed by epileptic fits. 
Therapies include fomentation (moist heat 
application), emetics, non-oily and oily enemas, 
purgatives, and the Vayu-reducing herbs mentioned 
above. 


Annaja-shOla 

Overeating during weakened digestion aggravates 
Vayu, preventing the digestive tract from digesting 
food. This causes intolerable colic pain. Symptoms 
include abdominal distention, epileptic fits, nausea, 
belching, vilambikd (see indigestion), shivering, 
vomiting, and fainting. Vayu-reducing therapies 
mentioned above are used. 

Gulma (benign abdominal tumor) therapies are 
used for all colic conditions. 


Hyperacidity 

Excessive gastric juice activity results in 
acidic or sour taste in the mouth. 

Causes: 

Vayu : A variable digestion cannot always digest 
foods. When food is not digested, dma develops. 
These undigested food toxins begin to ferment, 
causing burning sensations. 

Pitta : Eating too many hot, spicy, sour, greasy 
foods and spices (e.g., onions, garlic, red peppers); 
incompatible foods, alcohol, and overeating. Other 
causes include eating too many sweets, such as cakes, 


which ferment and produce acid in the stomach. 

Kapha : Weak digestion allows dma to develop 
when food is not digested. Thus, toxins ferment and 
cause burning sensations. 

Symptoms: 

Heartburn, belching with sour taste or fluids, 
nausea, vomiting. 

Therapies: 

Vayu : Hingwastdk, rock salt, lashunadi vati, 
clrdkshd, along with antacids like shankh bhasma, 
dvipattikar churna, fennel, and pravdl pishti. 

Pitta : Pitta-reducing foods and herbs, antacid 
foods like milk and ghee. Acidic and sour foods are 
avoided, including bananas (sour post-digestive 
taste), pickles, wine, and yogurt. Useful herbs include 
shatdvarl, licorice, aloe gel, chirdyatd, and antacids 
like shankh bhasma (conch shell ash) and dvipattikar 
churna. 

Kapha : Hingwastdk, rock salt, lashunadi bad, 
draksha; and antacids l ik e shankh bhasma (conch 
shell ash) and dvipattikar churna. 


Acid Gastritis/Acid Reflux (Amlapitta) 

This is an inflammation of the stomach and its 
fining. 

Causes and Symptoms: 

Eating incompatible food combinations, spoiled 
foods, and very sour or acidic foods or liquids 
increases Pitta in persons with already excessed Pitta. 
Symptoms include indigestion, exhaustion, nausea, 
belchings with bitter or sour taste, heaviness, loss of 
appetite, burning sensation in the chest and throat. 
Pitta symptoms are twofold, upward (urdhvaga) and 
downward (adhoga). 

Downward Symptoms : Thirst, burning sensations, 
fainting, giddiness, delusion, diarrhea, nausea, skin 
rashes, poor digestion, hair standing on end, 
perspiration, yellowish skin. 

Upward Symptoms : Vomiting green, yellow, black, 
blue, red, sour, thin, and sticky materials, followed 


. fg "Sfc 
















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


by mucus. Other symptoms include bitter or sour 
tastes from vomiting or belching, burning sensations 
in the throat, chest, upper abdomen, hands and feet; 
headache, loss of heat, loss of appetite, Kapha/Pitta 
fever, circular, itching, studded rashes with numerous 
pimples. 

The longer a person has had gastritis, the more 
difficult it is to heal. 

Vavu-caused : Tremors, delirium, fainting, 
sensations of pins and needles, weakness, pain, 
darkened vision, giddiness, delusion, hair standing 
on end. 

Kapha-caused : Expectorating thick phlegm, 
heaviness, fatigue, loss of appetite, coldness, 
weakness, vomiting, white coating on the tongue, 
burning sensation, itching, sleeping longer and more 
often. 

Vavu/Kapha-caused : Symptoms of both doshas. 

Pitta/Kapha-caused : Belching with bitter, sour, 
and pungent tastes, burning sensation in the chest, 
upper abdomen, and throat; giddiness, fainting, loss 
of appetite, vomiting, fatigue, headache, salivation, 
sweet taste in mouth. 


Therapies: 

Therapies are the same as for hyperacidity. Mi lk 
is recommended for Vayu and Pitta excesses. 


Malabsorption (Sprue) 

Causes: Environmental bacteria, poor eating habits, 
excessive eating or fasting, ingesting overly hot or 
cold items, eating canned, stale, or junk foods. It also 
develops from chronic diarrhea, constipation, or dys¬ 
entery; excessive use of purgatives or colonics, anti¬ 
biotics, and from excessive mental and physical 
stresses. 

Symptoms: 

Vayu : Variable digestion, white spots or ridges 


on fingernails, teeth marks on the front arc of the 
tongue, constipation, abdominal distention, migrat¬ 
ing pain, dry skin, cracked tongue, hemorrhoids, anal 
fissures, emaciation, weak muscles and bones, arthri¬ 
tis. Stools vary from watery to gaseous, hard, and 
dry movements. One may experience palpitations, 
anxiety, insomnia, depression, and faintness. 

Pitta : Overly strong digestion, dysentery or 
diarrhea (yellow-colored), abdominal pain, low-grade 
fevers, infections, inflammation, ulceration, burning 
sensation, anemia, malodorous feces, white spots or 
ridges on finger nails, teeth marks on the front arc of 
the tongue. The tongue marks deepen when angry or 
irritable (i.e., Pitta-increasing emotional situations). 

Kapha : Weak digestion, teeth marks on the front 
arc of the tongue, mucus in the stool, diarrhea and 
constipation, dull abdominal pain, congestion, edema, 
diabetes, white spots or ridges on fingernails. 

Therapies: 

General : Light, simple, easily digested meals 
depending upon one’s dosha. Yogurt-water (lassi) 
improves digestion. If persons are strong, they can 
tolerate a lassi fast for several days. Kichari (basmati 
rice and mungdal ) should then be introduced into the 
diet. Absorption-promoting herbs include cardamom, 
fennel, cumin, hantakl, and draksha wine. 

Vayu : Vayu-reducing foods and lassi with fresh 
ginger are beneficial. Herbs taken with meals include 
cardamom, pippali, fresh ginger, cinnamon, fennel, 
hihgwastak, cumin, chitrak, hantakl, lashunadi vati, 
and draksha wine. Useful foods include whole grains 
and steamed vegetables (i.e., not eaten raw). 

Pitta : Pitta-reducing foods and lassi with cardamom 
are beneficial. Herbs taken with meals include 
cardamom, fresh ginger, fennel, cumin, chitrak, 
hantakl, avipattikar churna, and draksha wine. 
Onions, garlic, red peppers, salty, fermented, fried 
and greasy foods increase Pitta, and therefore 
aggravate this condition. 


Kapha : Kapha-reducing foods and lassi (1/4 




















Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 15: Digestive System 


cup lo-fat yogurt: 3/4 cup water) with dry ginger are 
beneficial. Herbs taken with meals include cardamom, 
pippall, dry ginger, cinnamon, hingwastak, cumin, 
cliitrak, haritcikl, trikatu, lashunadi vati, and draksha 
wine. Dairy, cold liquids, raw vegetables, salt, and 
sweet aggravate this condition. 


Food Allergies 

This condition is due to weak immune and 
nervous systems, and poor digestion—that creates 
toxins in the body. These systems are weakened 
through taking antibiotics, junk food and food 
additives, environmental pollution, anxiety, worry, 
and stressful lifestyle. Children bom to mothers with 
weak immune systems and allergies may also exhibit 
these conditions; though breast-fed children are less 
likely to develop food allergies. 

Vayu doshas, having the most delicate nervous 
systems, are more likely to have food allergies. There 
may be a parallel emotion of not feeling nurtured. 
Kapha doshas, with weak digestive fire, may also 
exhibit food allergies. 

Symptoms: 

General : Gas, indigestion, bloating, diarrhea, 
constipation, congestion, skin rashes, headaches. 
Certain foods are more likely to cause allergic 
reactions such as milk and wheat (difficult to digest), 
com, soy; nightshades (contain alkaloids) such as 
eggplant, tomato; strawberries, peaches. 

Vavu : Beans, soy, corn, and other Vayu-in- 
creasing foods. 

Pitta : Nightshades and sour fruits (e.g., strawberries, 
peaches, apricots). 

Kapha : Dairy, wheat, and other Kapha-in-creasing 
foods. 

Therapies: 

General: Initially, persons need to avoid the foods 

& 


that cause allergic reactions while taking herbs to 
improve the digestion (e.g., cardamom, coriander), 
calm the nerves (e.g., gotu kola), and improve the 
immune system (e.g., guduchl); follow one’s dosha 
food plan, exercise, and reduce stress. 

Therapies listed under malabsorption are used here. 
Once the allergies are diminished, stronger immune- 
boosting herbs like shatdvarl and ashwagandhci can 
be taken. 


Parasites (Krimi) 

Causes: Both internal and external forms of parasites 
exist. Sweat, Kapha, blood, and feces are the 4 causes. 
There are 20 species of parasites. 

External (Bdhya): Parasites are the result of poor 
hygiene; they are the size, shape, and color of sesame 
seeds, have many legs, and reside in the hair and 
clothes. Two types exist: head lice and body lice. Head 
lice are black, and hide in the roots of hair. Body lice 
are white and reside in the hairs of the pubis and 
armpit, and are also found in clothes, particularly in 
the seams. Both are passed from person to another 
on combs, brushes, clothes, and other personal 
belongings, or their eggs are transmitted on loose 
hairs. They produce rashes, eruptions, itching, and 
small tumors. 

Internal (Abhyantara): Arise from aggravated 
doshas through unsuitable foods and life-styles, 
harmful or unethical actions such as scolding, 
defaming, killing, robbing, or unethical past life 
actions. The aggravated doshas invade all the channels 
inside the body, vitiating the skin, lymph, blood, and 
muscles, making these areas welcome spots for 
parasites to live. They are also caused by too many 
sweets, molasses, milk, yogurt, grains, Kapha grains 
(Kapha parasites), leafy vegetables (that cause more 
feces), and green legumes (feces parasites). 

Kapha: Parasites reside in the stomach and small 
intestine. When they increase in number, they move 
throughout the alimentary tract. Their size and shape 
vary. Seven species exist. They cause nausea, excess 
salivation, indigestion, loss of taste and appetite, 

Xk 















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


fainting, vomiting, fever, gas, abdominal distention, 
emaciation, excess sneezing and nasal mucus. 

Blood (Raktaia): Parasites reside in the blood 
vessels, are very small, without legs, round, copper 
colored, and are of six species. Symptoms include 
s ki n discoloration, burning, itching, pricking pain, 
raised patches, and symptoms of other skin diseases. 

These parasites are related to malaria, filaria, baci ll i 
(leprosy), and viruses in the blood, liver, and spleen. 
They come from mosquito, flea, and bedbug bites. 
Some parasites are carried in the alimentary tracts of 
people who help with health maintenance. 

Feces (Purlshaja >: Reside in the colon, usually 
moving downwards. When they increase in number 
they travel up to the stomach and small intestine. Then 
they cause the smell of feces in the mouth, belching, 
and exhalations. They are thick, round, thin, and 
threadlike, or thick, blue, yellow, white or black, and 
of five species. They cause diarrhea, dysentery, 
abdominal pain; they also cause food to remain 
undigested in the stomach, emaciation, poor digestion, 
and rectal itching when feces are expelled. 

Sweet—causes growth of parasites: Kapha/feces— 
intestinal parasites (round-worms, hook-worms, 
threadworms, tapeworms, amoebas, and eggs enter 
the body through infected water and food, when 
improperly cooked or cleaned. A strong digestion 
destroys the eggs and parasites, a weak digestion 
allows the eggs and parasites to grow and harm the 
person. 

Therapies: Parasites are more common in Vayu and 
Kapha doshas, usually associated with ama or 
undigested foods. Long-term infestation causes 
wasting of tissues and deranging Vayu. Parasites are 
found in the three doshas in 

Vayu: Stool 

Pitta: Blood 

Kapha: Mucus or mucus membranes, stomach, or 
small intestine. 


General- Tridoshic: 

1) First, a detoxification diet (ama reduction), 
avoiding sweets, meats, dairy, fried foods, and 
yeast products, while eating more lightly steamed 
vegetables. 

2) Puigation first, then 3 to 5 days on antiparasitic 
herbs. For gentle purgation a cup of triphala tea 
with two teaspoons of castor oil are be taken upon 
rising. By noon, three to five stools are passed. A 
stronger purgation involves making a rhubarb tea 
before bed (1 tsp. rhubarb powder). Rhubarb also 
has antiparasitical properties. 

3) Immune-boosting formulas l ik e sidclha 
makardhwaj, kutajahan vati and kutajarishta help 
quickly overcome parasites. 

Vayu: Certain herbs cause agni (digestive fire) to 
bum up the parasites: Hihg, black pepper, cayenne, 
triphala, musta. A Vayu-reduction diet avoiding rich 
and sweet foods, and using hot spices and castor oil 
puigatives. If malnourished or weak, ashwagandha, 
bald, or ginseng are added. 

Pitta : Bitter tastes cleanse and reduce worms. Herbs 
include vidahga (the main Ayurvedic herb for 
worms), kutaj (the main herb for amebic parasites— 
especially for amoebic dysentery), katuka, tulsl, be¬ 
tel nuts, musta, aloe gel, and chitrak. Pumpkin seeds 
may also be eaten freely throughout the day. Castor 
oil purgatives are also useful. A Ph/a-rcduction diet 
includes lots of raw foods, vegetable juices, and 
greens, and omits hot spices. 

Kapha: Bitter tastes cleanse and reduce worms, 
vidahga (the main Ayurvedic herb for worms), kutaj 
(main herb for parasites), katuka, tulsl, betel nuts, 
chirdyatd and musta, agni- (digestive fire) promot¬ 
ing herbs to bum up the parasites: hihg, black pep¬ 
per, pippall, and ginger. Pumpkin seeds may also be 
eaten freely throughout the day. An anti-Kapha diet 
with lots of hot spices (consume until sweating be¬ 
gins), sugar, and dairy are avoided; rhubarb root is 
used as a purgative. . ,., lL 

















Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 15: Digestive System 


Constipation (Anaha) 

Signs of a Healthy Colon: No tongue coating, easy 
passing of stool immediately upon waking in the 
morning. Stools should float (not sink), two to three 
stools daily. 

Signs of an Unhealthy Colon: The back third of 
the tongue is coated, stools sink, one or no stools 
passed daily. 

Causes: Eating foods that are difficult to digest 
and/or are Vayu-increasing; developing as a result of 
fever or infection, sleeping too much, suppressing 
the urge to defecate. Other causes include a hectic 
lifestyle, sexual intercourse in the morning (weakens 
the downward flow of ak/Apdna Vayu), coffee or tea 
in the morning (is drying), and a lack of exercise. 
Mental causes include excess emotions (e.g., worry, 
fear, anxiety, anger, impatience, nervousness.) 

Symptoms: 

Vayu : Dry colon, gas (with or without pain), 
abdominal distention, brownish coating on the back 
of the tongue, bad breath, anxiety, headache (because 
air is pushed upward instead of down and out with 
the stool), urge to urinate but difficulty passing urine. 

Pitta : Usually constipation occurs at the end of 
fevers because toxins collect in the small intestine 
and colon. Other causes include eating foods that are 
too greasy, fried, salty, spicy, pungent, and hot (i.e., 
Pitta-increasing items). Symptoms include anger, 
irritability, thirst, sweating, body odor, burning 
sensation, reddish tongue with yellow coating; bad 
breath, flushed complexion, headache, and violent 
dreams. The liver is usually in need of detoxification 
as well. 

Kapha : Causes include sleeping too long, day naps, 
lack of exercise, and Kapha-increasing foods. Excess 
mucus develops and clogs the system, causing 
heaviness, lethargy, fatigue, mucus in the stool, a pale, 
fat tongue with white or mucus coating, abdominal 
bloating, dull pain, edema. 




Therapies: 

General : The best herb for the colon is triphald, 
which draws toxins from the colon and promotes 
toning, rejuvenation, and the passage of stool. It is 
taken in the morning and evening (1/2 to 1 tsp. with 4 
times as much water). Triphald is a gentle and mild 
laxative made from three fruits, dmalaki, bibhltakl, 
and haritakl. To achieve a stronger effect, ginger is 
added to the mixture and haritakl is doubled in 
quantity. When passing stool, squatting is a more 
natural position for bowel movements. 

Vayu : Vayu-reducing foods, liquids, and fife-style 
are required. Ingesting ghee and sesame oil will 
moisten the colon, as will dairy and small quantities 
of oily foods like almonds and sesame tahini. Boiled 
mi lk with ghee and cinnamon are good to take before 
bed. Digestive herbs include ginger, cardamom, and 
fennel. Triphald is excellent, but castor oil (2 tsp. in a 
cup of boiled water before bed) is stronger and may 
be required if triphald is not effective. Castor oil doses 
need to be adjusted (more or less) according to 
individual needs. Herbs to boost digestion are also 
required; they include rock salt, hihg, lavan bhdskar 
chuma. Ishabgol (2 tsp.) taken in 1 cup of warm water 
before bed also relieves constipation. Dry foods (e.g., 
cabbage family, chips, beans) increase gas and 
constipation. Non-oily and oily enemas are also useful 
(see Chapter 7). 

Pitta : Pitta-reducing food, liquids, and life-style 
are required. Triphald , aloe vera, and fennel cleanse 
the colon, small intestine, and fiver (1/2 tsp. before 
bed). Warm milk and ghee before bed is beneficial. 
A rhubarb and fennel purgative is useful when 
constipation is not resolved by the therapies just 
mentioned. Before taking the rhubarb purgative, oil 
abhyahga and sweating therapies are required to move 
toxins in the body back to the small intestine where 
they first originated. 

Kapha : Kapha-reducing foods, liquids, and 
lifestyle are required. Fasting, exercise, mental 
stimulation, and less sleep help heal this condition. 
Sweets, dairy, yeast products, salt, fried and fermented 
foods aggravate this disorder. Triphald, aloe, and 
rhubarb are useful as a laxative and purgative. Hot 

















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


spices are also needed to reduce fat, mucus, and toxins 
in the body (e.g., dry ginger, black pepper, pippali, 
trikatu). One or 2 tsp. of herbs in a cup of hot water 
before sleep reverses this disorder. A non-oily enema 
with the above herbs cleanses the colon. 


Hemorrhoids (Arshas) 

Causes: Simultaneous vitiation of all three doshas 
weakens the skin, muscles, and fat, obstructing the 
veins in the muscles of the rectum. The predominating 
dosha will determine the main cause and symptoms. 

Varieties: Two types of hemorrhoids exist: those 
that are congenital or those acquired occurring during 
one’s life. Their symptoms are either dry or bleeding. 

Congenital (Sahaia): Due to improper or 
unhealthy activities of the parents or fate. This 
produces tridoshic hemorrhoids that can be checked, 
but not healed (as with all hereditary diseases). They 
are dry, face inward or outward; some are round, 
irregularly spread or matted together, yellowish-white, 
usually small, and accompanied by secondary 
diseases. 

After Birth (Janmotta-raia): Five types of this 
disease can occur: Vayu, Pitta, Kapha, Tridoshic, and 
blood-induced. Vayu and Kapha cause dry ( shushka) 
piles, while Pitta and blood cause bleeding 
hemorrhoids. 

Congenital Symptoms: Apcina Vayu, being 
obstructed from birth, moves the air upwards, 
aggravating the other 4 Vayu sub -doshas, Pitta, and 
Kapha. This develops the following conditions. 
Persons are bom thin, lean, emaciated, and weak, with 
excessive gas, urine, and feces that may be obstructed. 
Other symptoms include poor complexion, urinary 
tract stones, and gravel. Feces can vary, from 
constipation or dryness to diarrhea, or may be normal. 
Sometimes feces have toxins and mucus. They can 
be white, pale, green, yellow, reddish, thin, dense, 
and slimy. 

Severe pain may develop in the navel, urinary 
bladder, and pelvis areas. Other symptoms include 


dysentery, hair standing on end, urinary disorders, 
diabetes, intestinal gurgling, distention, a sensation 
of stic ki ness in the heart and sensory organs. Persons 
may experience excessive bitter and sour belching, 
poor digestion, irritability, weakness, and small 
amounts of seamen. Additional symptoms include 
frequent coughs, d iffi cult breathing, bronchial asthma, 
thirst, nausea, vomiting, anorexia, indigestion, chronic 
rhinitis, sneezing, fainting, and headaches. Persons 
may develop low, weak, hoarse, and broken voices; 
ear diseases, fevers, joint and bone pain associated 
with general weakness. Stiffness in the side of the 
chest and abdomen, urinary bladder, heart area, back 
and lumbar regions can occur. Mentally, one is very 
thoughtful, giddy, or lazy. 


Acquired Hemorrhoids 

Causes: 

General: Hemorrhoids are caused by excess 
aggravation of the doshas through improper diet and 
lifestyle that weaken the digestive fire. They may be 
caused by excess sex, riding, straining, sitting for long 
periods on uneven or hard seats, or on one’s heels. 
Other causes include enema nozzles, rough surfaces, 
washing with very cold water, straining during 
defecation, and suppression or early release of gas, 
urine, or feces. Emaciation caused by fever, 
abdominal tumors, diarrhea, excess dma, duodenal 
disorders, edema, anemia, and overexertion can also 
cause this disease. For women this disorder can be 
caused by abortion, miscarriage, and abnormal fetus 
development. This leads to an accumulation of 
undigested food (toxin waste or dma). Feces become 
lodged in the folds of the rectum, hardening and 
causing friction, thus developing hemorrhoids. 

Premonitory Symptoms: Weak digestion, weak 
thighs, twisting pain in calves, dizziness, 
enfeeblement of parts of the body, swelling of eyes, 


V 












Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 15: Digestive System 


diarrhea or constipation, gas with lower abdominal 
pain, cutting pain in the anus; feces are difficult to 
eliminate with accompanying noise. Other symptoms 
include intestinal gurgling, abdominal distention, 
emaciation, excess belching, excess urine, and insuf¬ 
ficient feces, not feeling the need to defecate, hot 
fumes, acidity, pain in the head, back, and chest, ex¬ 
haustion, s ki n discoloration, stupor, weakened sense 
organs, anger, and unhappiness. 

Development: 

General: Downward moving air (Apdna Vayu) 
moves upward because of obstructions of the rectum. 
This aggravates the other four forms of Vayu (Prdn, 
Udan, Vyan, Saman) in the body, as well as the urine, 
feces, Pitta, Kapha, the tissues (dhatus), and their sites. 
Thus, digestion is weakened, and dma and feces 
accumulate and sit in the folds of the rectum. 

Poor digestion, accumulation of sweat, urine, and 
feces can develop by eating too many heavy, sweet, 
cold foods and liquids that block the channels of 
circulation and cause burning sensations. Also, eating 
mutually contradictory foods, eating before the last 
meal is digested, eating too small portions, junk food 
or stale food, animal products or excessive amounts 
of pastries can cause trouble. Other causes include 
dry or raw vegetables, vinegar, garlic, pickles, heavy 
fruits, fermented wines, polluted water. External 
causes include excessive oleation therapy, not 
eliminating toxins, wrong use of enema therapy, lack 
of exercise, excessive sexual acts, and day naps. 

When Apdna Vayu is excessive, it pushes feces to 
the anal sphincter and aggravates it, developing 
hemorrhoids. Apdna Vayu is deranged from sitting 
on rough, hard, or uneven seats, bumpy rides, 
excessive sexual intercourse, enema nozzles 
improperly inserted, too much cold water, and 
scratching the anus. Other causes include straining 
in fife and in passing feces, suppressing the natural 
urges, miscarriage, pressure of the uterus during 
pregnancy, and abnormal delivery. 

Vayu: Eating astringent, pungent, bitter, dry, cold, 
and light food, eating too little food or fasting, 
drinking sharp alcohol, sex, living in too cold an 
environment, hard exercise, grief, and exposure to 


the wind. 

Pitta : Eating pungent, hot, salty, burning, and sharp 
foods (e.g., onions, garlic, cayenne), straining 
exercise, exposure to the sun and fire, living in very 
hot places, drinking alcohol, envy, anger, and 
impatience. 

Kapha: Eating sweet, oily, cold, salty, sour, and 
heavy foods, eastern winds, living in cold climates, 
mental lethargy. 

Tridoshie: Caused by combinations of foods and 
fife-styles mentioned above. 

Symptoms: 

General: Severe emaciation, lack of enthusiasm, 
helplessness, a weakened, broken voice, pale 
complexion, weakened tissues, and pain in the vital 
organs. Further symptoms include cough, thirst, bad 
taste in the mouth, difficult breathing, nasal mucus, 
exhaustion, faint body pains, vomiting, excessive 
sneezing, edema, fever, impotence, deafness, and 
blindness. Persons may develop urinary gravel or 
stones, worry, spitting, loss of appetite, pains in all 
the bones, joints, heart, navel, anus, and groin. Other 
symptoms include oozing from the rectum, 
hemorrhoids (either dry or bleeding—yellow, green, 
red, or slimy) may occur. 

Vayu: Dry, tingling, shriveled, bluish-red, uneven, 
coarse and hard, sharp, cracked, associated with pain, 
cramps and excessive itchiness, numbness, and 
tingling sensations. Other symptoms include severe 
pain in the head, ribs, shoulders, waist, thighs and 
groin, sneezing, and belching. Further disorders 
include food not moving through the digestive tract, 
sudden heart pain, loss of taste or appetite, cough or 
difficult breathing. Irregular digestion, ringing in the 
ears, dizziness, blackened skin, nails, feces, urine, 
eyes, and face may occur. Feces disorders include 
small quantity with noises and straining, or dysentery 
followed by painful release of frothy, slimy fluid. If 
this is not healed, it will lead to abdominal tumors, 
enlargement of the spleen, abdomen, and prostate. 














The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Oily and hot things relieve this condition. 

Pitta : Thin, soft, flabby hemorrhoids are blue, red, 
yellow, blue, or black in complexion, exuding thin 
blood with a foul smell and burning sensation in the 
body. Other symptoms include asthma, ulceration, 
fever, perspiration, excessive sweating and discharge, 
thirst, fainting, and loss of taste and appetite. Further 
disorders are delusion, heavy stool, brown, green, 
yellow or deep yellow complexion, eyes, and nails. 
The stool becomes yellow or red, and bloody, burning, 
and itching. Colic or pricking pain, yellow or green 
loose stools or diarrhea develops. Copious, yellow 
and malodorous urine and stool develop. Cold things 
bring relief. 

Kapha: Hemorrhoids are deeply rooted, large, 
swollen, thick, hard, round, white, and bulging. They 
may be oily, greasy, smooth, with dull pain (but 
painless to the touch), stiff, and rigid. Other symptoms 
include severe itching, cutting pain in the anus, urinary 
bladder, and navel region. Further developments 
include cough, difficult breathing, nausea, salivation, 
anorexia with mucus, and urinary disorders (e.g., 
dysuria, diabetes, stones, gravel). Persons may 
experience vomiting, excessive spitting, cough, cold, 
impotence, dull head pain, and fever with shivering. 
Feces symptoms include straining to eliminate, 
containing mucus and excess elimination. The stool 
can be reddish, white and sometimes with slimy 
discharge. The urine and stool are heavy, slimy, and 
white. Complexion becomes yellowish-white and 
greasy; there is constant edema, and the organs feel 
as though covered with sticky material. The mouth 
has a sweet taste. Tuberculosis and poor digestion 
associated with acute diseases caused by dma 
(undigested food toxins) can develop. This is a chronic 
condition. Dry and hot things bring relief. 

Tridosha: Symptoms of all three doshas will 
appear simultaneously. 

Blood: Hemorrhoids caused by blood aggravation 
have symptoms similar to Pitta and have the look of 
Vayu. Feces are hard, and hemorrhoids may bleed 
suddenly. This bleeding can lead to a greenish or pale 


complexion and to other diseases associated with loss 
of blood, strength, enthusiasm, and sensory abilities. 

The most serious secondary complication to arise 
along with hemorrhoids is constipation. 

The most serious forms of hemorrhoids occur with 
cardiac and/or rib pain, limb pain, fainting, vomiting, 
thirst, and inflammation of the anus. Almost as serious 
are symptoms of hand, leg, face, navel, anal, or testicle 
edema. In these cases, hemorrhoids can only be 
controlled, but they cannot healed. Also in this 
category are hereditary symptoms due to tridoshic 
causes, when found in the internal anal sphincter. 

If persons are strong and have good digestion, their 
hemorrhoids can be healed. Hemorrhoids may last 
for a long time when they are caused by the 
simultaneous imbalance of two doshas, when they 
are congenital, when they are tridoshic, or when they 
are found in the innermost folds of the rectum. 
However, they can be controlled if the digestive fire 
is adequately strengthened. Those hemorrhoids 
caused by two doshas found in the second rectal fold 
or those that have existed more than one year (chronic) 
are difficult to heal. Those caused by only one dosha, 
found in the outer folds and that are non-chronic, are 
easily healed. Some suggest surgery or cauterization 
with alkalis. 

There are 3 additional places where piles may 
occur: in the male organ (discussed later), at the navel 
(being slippery and soft), and on the skin as warts. 

Therapies 

General: Herbs of neem, triphald, guduchl, 
licorice, chitrak, viclahga, and pittapapra are most 
effective. 

Hemorrhoids are classified into 2 main categories, 
dry and wet. Those caused by Vayu and Kapha fall 
into the former category, those caused by Pitta and 
blood aggravation fall into the latter. Here blood is 
considered wet, and although Kapha hemorrhoids are 
oily, greasy, slimy, etc., they are considered dry. 











Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 15: Digestive System 


Dry Symptoms and Therapies: With numbness, 
edema, and painful lumps, the mass is first smeared 
with triphald, bilwa, or chitrak medicated oils. Af¬ 
terwards, warm or oily compresses (fomentation) of 
barley, or sesame seed powder, lukewarm compresses 
of vachd powder, com flour with sesame oil or ghee, 
dry radish pulp are applied. 

Next, herbal water made from herbs of bilwa, 
vasdk, arka, and castor oil may be sprinkled on the 
areas of the navel and anus. Persons may take sitz 
baths with water decoctions made from triphald, 
bilwa, yogurt-water, whey, or radish leaves. One 
prepares for the sitz bath by smearing warm triphald 
oil or ghee on the hemorrhoids. 

Aromatherapy includes burning and inhaling arka 
root, vidahga, barley, ashwagandha, or Pippali mixed 
with ghee. Ointments are also used, mixing sesame 
oil, ghee, or warm water with herbs until the mixture 
becomes a paste. The paste is smeared on the masses. 
Herbs used include pippali, chitrak, turmeric, 
triphald, and cane sugar. Ointments are specifically 
useful when there is edema, stiffness, itching, and 
pain. 

Herbs that reduce the various dosha- caused 
hemorrhoids are also used in the above therapies (i.e., 
cold, bitter herbs for Pitta; warm, oily herbs forVayu; 
bitter and warm herbs for Kapha). Bloodletting is 
administered (by qualified practitioners) when the 
above therapies do not work. 

Herbal powder mixtures (churnas) are also 
ingested; the mixture depends on the prevailing dosha 
causing the hemorrhoids. Triphald is a good general 
chiirna. Hot spices l ik e ginger, pippali, and black 
pepper (trikatu) are used for Vayu and Kapha 
conditions. These also help improve the digestive 
power, improve appetite, stimulate the downward 
movement of air (Apdna Vayu), reduce swelling, 
itching and pain, promote strength and complexion. 
Barley, turmeric, triphald, and vidahga are useful for 
Pitta conditions. 

When the patient suffers from both hemorrhoids 
and constipation, recipes include triphald decoction, 
triphald with yogurt-water ( lassi), or just haritaki with 
lassi. Lassi (buttermilk) is considered the best 
medicine for healing hemorrhoids caused by Vayu 
and Kapha (a teaspoon of ghee or sesame oil may be 
added for Vayu conditions). Depending upon the 


person’s strength and the season, they may take 
butter milk (lassi) from 1 week to 1 month, gradually 
increasing and decreasing the number of glasses per 
day. [1 month example: 1 lassi —first day. 2 las sis — 
second day... adding 1 lassi per day until 15 las sis on 
the 15th day. On the 16th day—14 lassis, the 17th 
day—13 lassis... reducing the amount by 1 each day 
until 1 lassi on the 30th day. 

If the person is weak, then lassi is given mornings 
and evenings. When persons are strong, they may 
mix fried barley flour with lassi for evening dri nk s. 
Rock salt (saindav namak), found in any Indian 
grocery store, may be added to the drink. Meals are 
eaten using foods that balance the person’s dosha. 
After meals lassi with ghee or oil, mixed with basmati 
rice is taken. 

There are 3 types of lassi: (one for each dosha), 
Vayu’s lassi is made with whole milk. Pitta’s lassi is 
made with skim milk. Kapha’s lassi is made with 
fat-free milk. Lassi cleanses the circulatory channels, 
enabling the plasma (rasa) to reach and nourish all 7 
tissue layers (dhatus). It is said that hemorrhoids 
healed with lassi will not develop again. 

Other useful foods and drinks: 

1) Thin gruel (peyd) —rice flour , pippali, chitrak, 
bilwa, lassi, fried in ghee oroil forVayu hemorrhoids. 
A peyd mix is 50 gms. (1.76 oz) basmati rice cooked 
with 8 times as much water. 

2) Thick gruel (yavdgu)—Basmati rice with 
pippali, lassi, black pepper for Vayu and Kapha. A 
yavdgu mix is 50 gms. basmati rice cooked with 2 to 
4 times as much water. 

3) Vegetable soup—boiled and dry pashana 
bedha, dried radish, bilwa, lassi, any astringent herbs 
(e.g., raspberry) for Pitta. 

4) For hemorrhoids with constipation—drinks 
consisting of cane sugar, ghee, barley, gokshura, and 
lassi are for all doshas. 

Cane sugar, barley flour, pomegranate juice, 
boiled water, and black salt for Vayu. 










The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Barley, honey, pippall, dry ginger, black pepper, 
rock salt, and las si for Kapha and Vayu. 

5) Green leafy vegetables are especially good for 
Pitta. 

6) Fresh white unsalted butter with sugar and 
sesame seeds also heals this disease if taken for a 
long time. 

Enemas: 

1) For gastritis (upward moving air [Updna 
Vayu]— chitrak, pippall, bilwa, licorice decoction). 
This is an anuvdsana enema. 

2) Medicated enema for Vayu—milk, decoction 
of dashmul, castor oil, and black salt. This is a niruha 
enema. 

Bleeding Hemorrhoid Therapy: Two types of this 
therapy exist: when Pitta is predominant, and when 
Kapha or Vayu are secondarily aggravated. 

Signs of Vayu as a secondary cause—grayish 

color, hard and dry stool, not releasing gas through 
the anus, blood from hemorrhoids is thin, reddish, 
and foamy, pain in lumbar, thighs, and anus, great 
weakness. This is caused by drying foods and life¬ 
styles. [Vayu predominance—develops even in Pitta 
and Kapha excesses if bleeding is excessive.] 

Therapies include oily and cold foods and life¬ 
styles. 

Signs of Kapha as a secondary cause—stool is 
loose, yellow, white, dry, heavy and cold; blood from 
hemorrhoids is dense, thready, pale yellow, and s li my. 
There is sliminess and numbness in the region of the 
anus. This is caused by heavy and dry foods and life¬ 
styles. 

Therapies include dry and warm foods and life¬ 
styles. First, detoxifying or elimination therapies (e.g., 
fasting, purgation, emesis) are recommended, then 
herbs are taken. 

Hemostatic Therapies (slopping bleeding): When 
toxic blood is exuded, continued bleeding is necessary 
to release the toxins. Should bleeding be stopped too 


soon, it can lead to various other diseases of Rakta 
Pitta. Examples include bleeding from other parts of 
the body, fever, morbid thirst, weakening digestion, 
anorexia and, jaundice. Other disorders include 
edema, colic pain in the anus and pelvic areas, s kin 
diseases in the lumbar region and thighs, anemia, 
retention of gas, urine, and stool, headache, and 
heaviness. 

Bitter drugs stimulate the digestion, metabolism, 
and stoppage of bleeding. If V ayu is predominant even 
after the toxins are eliminated, then oily liquids, 
massage, and anuvdsana enemas are suggested. If 
Pitta is the only cause of the illness, and bleeding 
occurs in the summer, then hemostatic therapies are 
immediately given to stop the bleeding. 

Hemostatic herbal decoctions: Kutaj, ginger 
(coagulates blood), sandalwood, neem, musta, bilwa, 
ndgkehar, pittapapra, red lotus, white lotus, bald, and 
cinnamon. 

Recipes: Fried barley flour with any of the above 
herbs, onions taken alone or with barley and sugar 
(or with lassi, butter, and sesame seeds). 

Sprinkling water, sitz baths, and ointments made 
from the above herbs also help stop bleeding. Water 
decoctions include licorice, arjuna, neem, and vdsdk. 
Bath herbs include sandalwood and licorice. 
Ointments include ghee with sandalwood and neem 
oils. 

If rectum prolapse (determined by feeling a Pitta/ 
Vayu pulse) or burning or stickiness in the anus 
occurs, then it is rubbed with sesame oil or ghee and 
mahjishthd, licorice, sandalwood and neem, honey, 
and ghee, red and white sandalwood. 

Continuous Bleeding Therapy: Forehead paste and 
soup made of durba (the best blood coagulative), 
sandalwood, and ghee. Also, anuvdsana enemas with 
the luke-warm upper portion of ghee, durba, and 
sandalwood. 

Summary: Vayu uses oily, sour and sweet 
therapies, Pitta uses bitter, dry and cool therapies, 
Kapha uses hot therapies. 

Either hemorrhoids, diarrhea, and sprue (graham — 
malabsorption, anemia, and gastrointestinal disorders) 














Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 15: Digestive System 


can cause the development of the other 2 diseases. 
They develop from poor digestion and are healed by 
strengthening the digestive power. Generally 
hemorrhoids are healed by eating fried vegetables, 
thick barley gmel, vegetabl dghee soup, milk, and 
lassi. 


Bloating 

Due to Hemorrhoids (Udavarta) 

Causes: Vayu is aggravated in the colon by eating 
air-increasing foods and drinks, i.e., foods that are 
bitter, astringent, and dry (e.g., broccoli, barley, apples, 
most beans, and dry cereals). 

Developmental Symptoms: The accumulated air 
then becomes aggravated, blocking the downward 
movement of Vayu (Apcina). This dries the moisture 
in these channels, obstructing the movement of feces, 
gas, and urine. 

Following this, severe pain develops in the lower 
abdomen, ribs, back, and heart area, along with 
gripping abdominal pain, nausea, cutting pain in the 
rectum, severe and constant pain in the urinary 
bladder; cheeks may swell. Vayu moves upward. 

The next stage of symptoms includes vomiting, 
anorexia, fever, other Vayu diseases of the heart, 
duodenum, and urine suppression. Other disorders 
include dysentery, deafness, blindness, difficult 
breathing, headache, cough, nasal mucus, mental 
anxiety, worry or fear, thirst, bleeding, abdominal 
tumors, and enlarged abdomen. Being secondary 
complications, these diseases—when associated with 
hemorrhoids—are difficult to heal. Therefore, 
constipation is the main complication to heal before 
these other symptoms appear. 

Therapies: 

Triphala —Vayu 

Castor oil—Pitta, Pitta/Vayu—2 teaspoons in 
a cup of hot water before bed. 
Rhubarb—for stronger measures Senna—the 
strongest therapy. 

Therapies include oil massage (oleation) followed 

by sudation (sweating). Afterwards, oleation and 

& 


sudation herbal suppositories are given, made of 
pippali, madanphal, charcoal ash, mustard, and 
jaggery. In difficult cases castor oil purgation and 
niruha basti (enema) (mainly using castor oil) are 
used. 


Obesity 

Causes: Generally, acceptable weight levels 
depend on cultural beliefs. Westerners aim at the slim, 
Pitta form. More ancient cultures praise Kapha forms 
(where physical activity is also more prevalent). Thus 
the definition of over-weight may be determined by 
whether it causes health problems. 

Causes of overweight include overeating, exces¬ 
sive eating of heavy or cold things, and oversleeping 
and lack of exercise. Other causes include hormone 
imbalance, emotional sentimentality, clinging, loss 
of love or low self-worth, insecurity, and poor diges¬ 
tion. Weight-reducing and appetite-suppressing drugs 
can weaken the digestion and increase air (thereby 
aggravating Vayu). When overweight causes poor 
digestion, nutrients are not absorbed. Even after eat¬ 
ing, the body does not receive the nutrients. So it sends 
a message to the brain to eat again. Even still, the 
digestive fire is unable to extract nutrients from the 
food. Thus, a vicious cycle of eating and overeating 
develops (absorbing little or no nutrition). 

Vayu: Sudden and fluctuating weight: (over, under, 
normal), variable hunger, eating lots of sugar to calm 
the nerves. Eating offers a feeling of security. 

Vdyu/Kapha: This constitution reflects a nervous 
mind and weak digestion. Pitta: Overeating is their 
main cause because appetite is strong. There may be 
addiction to sugar and red meat. Weight develops 
muscle and flabbiness. 

Kapha: This is the most common dosha that develops 
obesity, slow metabolism, easy weight gain, 














The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


continuous appetite (addicted to eating), hypothyroid 
or other hormonal conditions that cause retention of 
weight, mainly water and fat retention, weak pancreas 
and kidneys, low pulse and energy, flabbiness, pallor, 
moist complexion and skin, excess phlegm or saliva, 
subcutaneous fat deposits and benign tumors may 
develop. 

Therapies: 

General: A mild, long-term reducing plan is more 
natural than crash diets. Winter is not a good time to 
begin dieting because the cold can lower one’s 
resistance and body heat. Reducing or lightening 
therapy is needed, with a light diet, fasting, digestive 
(spicy) herbs, mild laxatives, and tonics like guggul 
(1 gram 3 times daily) or shildjit (1/2 gram twice 
daily). This reduces obesity in a few months. Brdhmi 
calms the mind for conditions of excessive eating. 
Vdyu: Vayu-reducing herbs, diet, and lifestyle, 
complex carbohydrates (whole grains and starchy 
vegetables), avoidance of refined sugar, fewer hot 
spices and more sweet digestives like cardamom, 
coriander, brdhmi, jatdmdnshl, and ashwagandha 
calm the mind. Guggul helps cleanse and warm the 
body. 

Pitta: Pitta-reducing foods, avoiding meat, fish, 
oily, greasy, or fried foods, sugars, and desserts. Raw 
salads, green herbs, and chlorophyll, digestive bitters 
and bitter laxatives are the best foods to reduce weight 
and counter sugar addiction. Herbs include aloe vera 
gel, katukd, turmeric, bhudmalakl. 

Kapha: Kapha-reducing foods, avoiding refined 
sugars, salt, dairy, sweet fruit, bread, pastry, meat, 
fish, fruit juices, cold liquids, and oils. The best foods 
for digestion are sprouts: their enzymatic properties 
help digestion. Meals are eaten after 10:00 a.m. and 
before 6:00 p.m. Hot spices and fasting (if one is 
strong) help raise the metabolism. Spice teas, 
vegetable juices, steamed vegetables, beans, and 
whole grains are also advised. Suggestions include 
less sleep, no naps, and strong, aerobic exercise. Hot 
digestive herbs like black pepper, ginger, turmeric, 
and trikatu bum up fat and raise the digestive fire. 
Bitter herbs reduce fat and dry water. Bitters include 
katukd, myrrh, triphald, and guggul. Gokshura is a 
gentle diuretic. Shildjit helps the kidneys, brdhmi is 
a useful nervine to calm the mind. 


Candida (Yeast) 

Cause: Usually starts in GI tract, then moves to 
the blood and other organs. Candida is generally 
caused by weak digestion due to dma (toxin). It is 
usually due to high Vayu or Kapha, but it can also be 
caused by Pitta. Excessive use of sugars, drugs, 
antibiotics, frequent colds and flu, weak nervous 
system, worry, fear, grief, and anger can also cause 
Candida. 


Symptoms: 

General: Chronic low energy, low-grade fevers, 
variable digestion, poor immune functioning, and 
food allergies. 

Vdyu: Insomnia, lower back pain, dry skin, 
nervous, restless, light-headedness, ringing ears, 
depression, gas, bloating, constipation, and variable 
energy. 

Pitta: Fever, thirst, burning, hyperacidity, and 
infections. 

Kapha: Phlegm, frequent colds and flu, swollen 
glands, edema, heaviness, dullness, and excess 
sleeping. 

Dual and Tridosha: Symptoms of 2 or all 3 doshas. 
Therapies: 

General: This condition is treated similarly to 
parasites. The goal is to destroy the yeast and boost 
the immune system. This is achieved through 
restoring digestive and immune strength. 

Refined sugars, white bread, yeast products, dairy, 
sweet fruit, raw foods, and cold drinks are avoided. 

Vdyu: Antifungal herbs include asafoetida, garlic, 
ginger, pippall, trikatu, triphald, vidahga, musta. 
Vidahga and musta are antifungal but deplete the 
immune system, so they are best used for only 1 or 2 
weeks. Digestive herbs include cardamom, cumin, 
ginger. Immune herbs include brdhmi, guduchl, bald, 
yogaraj guggul, and saffron. Later, shatdvarl and 
ashwagandha are taken. 

Pitta: Vidahga and musta are used as antifungal herbs. 
Digestives include coriander, fennel, and turmeric. 
Immune herbs include brdhmi, guduchl, bald, 
kaishore guggul, saffron, and neem. Later, shatdvarl 
is used. 



















Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 15: Digestive System 


Kapha: Vidahga and musta as antifungal herbs: 
cardamom, ginger, asafoetida, trikatu, and triphald 
as digestive herbs. Immune-boosting herbs include 
gokshura, brahml, guduchi, bald, saffron. Also guggul 
and neem are used. 

Lyme disease has been helped by Pitta-type 
Candida therapies and antibacterial herbs. We have 
found this therapy to be helpful in all lyme disease 
cases at our center. 


Ulcers 

Inflamed ulcers are discussed in the next chapter. 
Here stomach ulcers are reviewed. When the mucus 
lining of the stomach becomes inflamed, one 
experiences pain, burning sensation, and eventual 
bleeding. The current Western view of ulcers is that 
they are caused by bacteria. Both viewpoints are 
discussed below. 

Bacterial Therapies: 

Ayurvedic therapies include antibacterial 
therapies. 

Vayu: Garlic, sandalwood, jasmine, turmeric. 
Pitta: Chirayatd, golden seal, aloe, sandalwood, 
jasmine, turmeric. 

Kapha: Garlic, golden seal, aloe, sandalwood, 
turmeric. 

Inflammation Therapies: 

Usually these conditions develop from mental 
stress, worry, overwork, nervous sensitivity, etc. Foods 
also can play a part in this condition: for example, 
eating overly hot and spicy foods and drinking ex¬ 
cessive amounts of alcohol. 

General: It is best to follow a bland food plan with 
easily digestible items. A milk fast is beneficial. Al¬ 
cohol and smoking aggravates ulcers, as do garlic, 
onions, pickles, vinegar, and salt. Bananas and the 
nightshade family of vegetables and fruit can also 
cause trouble. Therapies for hyperacidity are recom¬ 
mended here. Herbs to protect the mucus lining of 
the stomach are useful, and include aloe gel, 
shatdvan, and licorice. 

Vayu: Symptoms include more pain than burn¬ 


ing, feeling cold, light-headedness, anxiety, with in¬ 
somnia, gas, constipation, abdominal distention, and 
palpitations. Heat applied to the stomach brings re¬ 
lief. Excessive meals of dry and light foods can dry 
up the mucus secretions causing an ulcer. Thus a 
Vayu-reducing diet is recommended. After a bland 
diet is followed for some time, spices can be safely 
used, such as hihgwastdk, lavan bhaskar churna, and 
trikatu (unless the tongue is dry, cracked or reddish). 
These herbs are taken with warm milk or ghee. 

Pitta: Burning sensation is the predominant 
symptom. Anger and impatience are mental causes 
of Pitta ulcers. A Pitta-reduction diet is advised, along 
with bitter herbs like aloe, barberry, chirayatd, katukd, 
and mahasudarshan churna; also demulcents l ik e 
shatdvan. 

Kapha: Ulcers are rare for this dosha. Physi¬ 
cal symptoms include white or clear phlegm, nau¬ 
sea, lack of appetite, dull pain, and heaviness. Men¬ 
tal causes include greediness, grief, or emotional at¬ 
tachment. Herbs to digest mucus are recommended 
(e.g., trikatu, pippall, black pepper, and dry ginger). 


Ama 

Ama has been discussed throughout this book. 
When ama (undigested food toxin) is present it can 
cause many diseases. Thus, one can follow a special 
ama-reducing diet that mainly decreases excess 
Kapha (because foods that increase Kapha increase 
ama). An anti -ama diet is depleting, so the length of 
time persons should adhere to this diet depends upon 
their physical strength. Kapha doshas can stay on this 
plan for long periods of time. Pitta doshas eventu¬ 
ally need to introduce rejuvenation therapies. Vayu 
doshas, the weakest of the constitutions, are advised 
to stay on this diet for only 1 week before adding 
rejuvenating herbs and foods. The chart below lists 
flma-reducing foods. Foods are chosen from the dma- 
reducing column, according to one’s dosha. 



v 








The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Ama-Reducing Diet 

Ama Reducing 

Ama Increasing 

Lemon, lime, grapefruit, pomegranate, cranberry 

Sweet fruits 

Steamed veggies (Vayu and Kapha)/ Raw (Pitta). Best 

Potatoes, mushrooms, carrot juice (pure or 

sources: sprouts, vegetable juices 

unmixed is too sweet) 

Whole grains (oats and wheat in moderation); kicharl 

Breads, pastries, white flour products 
containing yeast 

Mung beans (dal) 

All other beans 

Pumpkin seeds in moderation 

Nuts and seeds 

Acidophilus, yogurt water (shaken - Takra ) 

Dairy 

— 

Pork, meat, fish, poultry, eggs, lard 

Ghee (moderation), mustard and flax oils 

Oils 

Raw homey 

Sugars 

Spices 

Salt 

Warm liquids (e.g herb tea) 

Cold liquids, coffee 


Abdominal Digestive Organs 



Esophagus 
Diaphragm 
Stomach 
Spleen 
Liver 

Gall Bladder 
Duodenum 
Pancreas 
Transverse Colon 
Ascending Colon 
Small Intestine 
Peritoneum 
Descending Colon 
Cecum 
Appendix 
Sigmoid Colon 
Rectum 














































Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 16: Infections/Wounds 


Thinking of sense objects causes attachment. 

From attachment arises longing and from longing anger is bom [anger causes fever]. 
From anger arises delusion; from delusion, loss of memory is caused. From loss of memory, the 
discriminative faculty is mined, and from the min of discrimination, one perishes. 
Bhagavad Gita Chapter 2; verse 62-63 

It is desire, it is anger, bom of Rajas Guna (passion); of unappeasable craving and great sin; 
know this as the foe in the world. - Bhagavad Gita Chapter 3; verse 37 

Chapter 16 

Infections or Wounds 
Fever, Abscess, Sinus, Wounds, Inflamed Ulcers, 

F ractures/Dislocations 


Fever (Jwara) 

r ever, known as the lord of diseases, is said 

to be the most painful of all diseases. Its heat 
destroys the ojas (life sap) and afflicts the body, 
senses and the mind. It was the first disease of hu¬ 
mans and is the first illness to develop among all dis¬ 
eases. Fevers afflict the entire mind and body. It is 
considered the most powerful of all diseases because 
it produces various forms of death and is also present 
during birth. 

The Vedic mythology of fever states that it origi¬ 
nated in Lord Rudra (Shiva —the destroyer of igno¬ 
rance) who unleashed his wrath on the asuras (de¬ 
mons). In the process, the gods (elements of nature) 
became afflicted with burning sensations and pain, 
and all creatures became unconscious. The gods pro¬ 
pitiated Shiva who restored them to health. He said 
that anger will take the form of fever, afflicting people 
at birth, death, and when they do not follow their pre¬ 
scribed Ayurvedic life-styles. In short, people living 
virtuously will not suffer from fever. Fever causes 
emaciation, delusion, and heat discomfort, caused by 
unhealthy lifestyle habits and improper conduct. 

In conventional medicine (allopathic) fever is also 
the predominant and common symptom of all illness. 
Fever is seen as the first warning the body gives in 
response to any imbalance or infection. 


Eight Fever Types 

There are 8 major forms of fever: Vayu, Pitta, 
Kapha, Vayu/Pitta, Vayu/Kapha, Pitta/Kapha, Tri- 
dosha (Sannipatika 13 types), and external causes 
(five types). Both tridosha fevers and external causes 
can be provoked by one or two predominating doshas, 
and the blockage of life sap (ojas). Five varieties of 
recurring fevers ( vishamsa jwara) also exist (malaria- 
related). Fevers have three stages, which will be de¬ 
tailed later. 

Cause and Development of Fever 

Improper or excessive use of oil, inflammation, over 
fatigue, wasting, indigestion, intake of bad, toxic or 
poisonous substances, poor diet, sudden change of 
diet or weather, poor conduct, grief, anger, passion, 
toxic fumes, malefic planets and stars at birth, spells, 
curses, or factors related to child birth (i.e., miscar¬ 
riage, untimely delivery, improper self-care after de¬ 
livery or during the first accumulation of breast milk 
after delivery). 

Development: The doshas thus becoming vitiated 
and 

1. Enter the stomach and intestines (amdshaya) 
[each respective dosha, Vayu, Pitta, Kapha, when 






The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


entering the amashaya will aggravate and develop 
into its respective dosha fever] 

2. Mix with dma (undigested food toxins) 

3. Lodge in the plasma or lymph chyle (rasa) due to 
their inherent heat. 

4. Then, they mix with the plasma, obstructing the 
plasma (rasa), hemoglobin (rakta), muscle (mamsa) 
and sweat channels (sweda srotas). 

5. Next, it pushes the agni digestive fire enzymes 
out of the GI tract. The agni then spreads throughout 
the body (i.e., into all of the tissues, organs, etc.), 
pushing the heat to the skin. This raises the body’s 
temperature and stops perspiration. The parallel of 
this process in modern science is known as the 
increase of metabolic activity. This in turn increases 
body temperature. 

To learn all necessary information about fever, the 
Ayurvedic practitioner (vaidya) must analyze the, 


1. Nature of the 
disease 

9. Symptoms and 
signs 

2. Precipitating 
factors 

10. Doshas involved 

3. Origin 

11. Features 

4. Cause 

12. Healing signs 
and symptoms 

5. Premonitory or 
incubatory signs and 
symptoms 

13. Preventing 
relapse 

6. Location 

14. Reasons for 
relapse 

7. Strength of the 
disease 

15. Healing the 
relapse 

8. Time of 

occurrence 



Further, the vaidya needs to have an understand¬ 
ing of fever caused by alcohol, the seven dhcitus, 
knowledge of the first and later stages of fever and 


chronic fevers. 


Causes of Fever 


Either the mind or the body can be the cause of a 
fever. Mythologically, it is said that the Soma god 
causes cold fevers and the Agni god causes hot fe¬ 
vers. Fevers occurring in their respective season are 
healed in their respective season. Fevers are easily 
healed, difficult to heal, or incurable. 

Incubatory or Premonitory 


Signs and Sym 

ptoms 

listless 

indifference 

sluggish 

heaviness 

lassitude 

fainting 

low 

spirit 

distaste 

no appetite 

teary eyes 

body aches 

tires easily 

indigestion 

low strength 

excess sleep 

drooping 

great thirst 

tingling teeth 

calf pain 

forgetfulness 

depression 

dark vision 

moody 

hair stands 
on end 

pale 

complexion 

excess 

yawning 

desire hot/ 
cold things 
alternately 

desire 
pungent, 
sour and 
salty tastes 

impatience 
for good 
advice 

strongly dislike sweets, music, children, 
cold water, shade and sun 


mental/physical 

cold/heat 


internal/extemal 


seasonal/unseasonal 


curable/incurable 









































Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 16: Infections/Wounds 


’remonitory Dosha Symptoms 

Vayu 

constant yawning 

Pitta 

burning eyes 

Kapha 

loss of hunger 

Tridosha 

all symptom 

Dual -Dosha 

symptoms of both 


Causes Aggravating Air Fevers (Vayu Jwara 


snuff 

assault 

fasting 

anxiety 

grief 

excess 

exercise 

suppression 
of natural 
urges 

staying up 
late 

poor posture 

excess emesis, purgation or 
drying enemas 

excess sex 

Over indulgence of oily, 
light, cold foods 

excess 

blood- letting 



Symptoms of Air Caused Fevers 
(Vayu Jwara) 


twisting calf 
pain 

loss of 
sensation 
and rigidity 
of the feet 

contracting 
abdominal 
or shoulder 
pain 

loose joints 

weak thighs 

ringing ears 

no 

elimination 
of sweat, 
feces or urine 

sharp, 

cutting pain 
in upper 
body 

reddish face, 
eyes, nails, 
urine, throat, 
lips, skin, 
feces 

splitting 
back or bone 
(and rib) 
pain, dry skin 

astringent or 
bad taste in 
the mouth 

loss of taste 
and lack of 
hunger 

chest pain 

anorexia 

desiring sun 

headache 

dizziness 

insomnia 

dry cough or 
dry heaves 

hair stands 
on end 

dry lips, 
mouth, throat 

sorrow 

dry skin 

indigestion 

drooping 
body parts 

intermittent 
temple pain 

rambling 

speech 

desiring hot 
things 

irregular 

temperature 

irregularity- 

acute/mild 

shivering 

stiff jaw 

tingling teeth 

irregularity 
in onset and 
alleviation 

occuring after digestion in 
the afternoon, dawn, end of 

summer 


The general words to describe Vayu fever 
symptoms are sharp, cutting, shifting pain, 
coldness, and dryness. 


* 























































The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Causes Aggravating Fire Fevers (Pitta Jwara 


irregular diet 

eating with 
indigestion 

exposure to 
hot sun and 
fires 

exhaustion 

excessive hot, salty, sour 
and pungent foods 


Symptoms of Fire Caused Fevers 


(Pitta Jwara) 

dizzy 

fainting 

toxicity 

diarrhea 

acidity 

great thirst 

red skin 
rashes 

burning 

sensations 

rambling 

speech 

perspiration 

high fever 

bile in vomit 

expectorating 

blood 

desiring cold 
things 

malodorous 

breath 

delirium 

restlessness 

naps 

hives 

giddiness 

intoxication 

occurs 

during 

digestion 

occurs at noon, midnight, 
autumn 

pungent 

taste 

green/yellow 
skin, nails, 
eyes, urine, 
stool 

liking cold 
things 


Symptoms of Water Caused Fevers 
(Kapha Jwara) 


lassitude 

nausea 

mild fever 

sweet taste 

. 

running nose 

heaviness 

glassy/white 

eyes 

cold 

swellings 

no hunger or 
taste 

drowsiness 

slight heat 

acid belching 

obstructed 
channels 
(, srotas ) 

no 

assimilation 
of foods 

obstructed 
feces, urine, 
sweat 

difficult 

breathing 

fever after 
eating 

desiring hot 
things 

goose bumps 

cough 

shivering 

fainting 

stupor 

heart coating 

slight limb 
pain 

increased 

salivation 

cold skin 
eruptions 

heavy chest 

vomiting 

poor 

digestion 

whitish skin, 
nails, mucus, 
urine, stool 

fever during 
morning, 
evening, 
spring 

desiring hot 
things 


The key words for Kapha fevers are white, cold, 
slow minded. 


In short, the key words for Pitta fevers include, 
heat, sweat, red, yellow, or green, blood, bile, 
impatience. 


Causes Aggravating Kapha Fevers 


Causes of Multiple Dosha Fevers 

Four types of multiple fevers exist. 

1. Vayu/Pitta 

2. Vayu/Kapha 

3. Pitta/Kapha 

4. Vayu/Pitta/Kapha 


lack of lack of 

discipline exercise 


naps 


excess intake of oily, heavy, sweet, slimy, 
cold, sour and salty foods 


Again, these fevers have 12 subdivisions, when 
one, two or all three doshas are predominant (e.g., 
Vayu/Pitta equal predominance, Vayu/Pitta with 
Vayu predominance, Vayu/Pitta/ Kapha with Pitta 
and Kapha predominance, etc.) 


























































Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 16: Infections/Wounds 


Fevers of all three doshas begin during their 
respective times of day (or night), season, and 
digestion (as discussed earlier). The rainy season (mid 
July- mid September) is most likely to cause Vayu 
fevers. The autumn season (mid September- mid 
November) is most likely to produce Pitta fevers. The 
spring season (mid March- mid May) is when Kapha 
fevers are most likely to occur. When dosha fevers 
arise outside their respective season they are more 
difficult to heal, unseasonal Vayu fevers are the most 
difficult. All Vayu fevers are usually difficult to heal. 

During the seasonal fevers, food may be taken (i.e., 
fasting is not necessary). Fasting is advised when 
persons are strong and the Sun is weak (rainy, autumn 
and winter seasons). It is also necessary for 
practitioners to remember that Vayu and Pitta are 
weak at the beginning of spring. They are moderately 
strong in the middle of the season and strong at the 
end of this time. Similarly, Kapha is weak at the 
beginning of autumn, moderate in the middle and 
strong at the end of this season. Thus, the strength of 
the patient with fever is known at these times. 

Other causes include combinations of these 
factors, or due to, 


irregular diet 


fast 


poison intake 


improper oleation, fomentation, emesis, 
purgation, or enema; improper diet or 
lifestyle after pahcha karma 


improper child deliver or poor diet after 
delivery 


sudden change in diettoxic fumes or 
materials 


Two Dosha Fevers (Dwandvaja Jwara) 

Fevers caused by two doshas exhibit symptoms 
of both doshas. Vayu/Pitta fevers cause a desire for 
cold things (i.e., Pitta heat predominates). Vayu/ 
Kapha fevers cause a desire for hot things. 

Tridosha Fevers (Sannipata Jwara) 

Sannipata Jwaras are caused by the same actions 
described above for each dosha. Thus, fevers caused 


by all three doshas exhibit symptoms of all three 
doshas. 

During dual or tridosha fevers, one dosha is 
predominant. Thus, the predominant dosha is mainly 
focused on when healing the illness. 

Difficult to Heal or Incurable Sannipata 

Dosha obstruction or non-elimination, destroyed 
agni enzymes, fully manifested signs and symptoms. 


Externally Caused Fevers (Agantu) 

Four types of externally caused fevers exist. 

L Trauma or Injuries are associated with Vayu 
within vitiated blood ( rakta) [and sometimes the other 
tissues (dhatus)]. Symptoms include pain, swelling 
and discoloration. According to modem science, these 
symptoms are explained as inflammations caused by 
infections or injuries. 

2. Fmotions. Infections (e.g.. bacteria. 

virus, poisons). Evil Spirits 

Emotions are caused by vitiated Vayu and Pitta. 
They first occur in the mind, then fever develops 
during the times and seasons of the respective doshas. 
Modern Psychology calls these events 
psychosomatic; the mind affects the health of the 
body. 

Anger is due to excess Pitta (and sometimes the 
other doshas). Its symptoms include wrath, tremors, 
and headache. 

Fear is aggravated by Vayu. Its symptoms are 
delirium and apprehension. 

Grief is aggravated by Vayu. Its symptoms are 
excessive crying or heavy breathing. 

Lust is caused by excess Pitta, and produces loss 
of appetite, burning sensations, frequent breaths, 
absence of shame, sleep, intelligence and courage. 

Pollen. Dust causes fainting, headaches, vomiting, 
intoxicating, wetness and sneezing, and is 


w 

¥ 






















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


caused by all doshas. This is easily healed. 

Poison symptoms include blackened face, 
burning sensations, diarrhea, heart pain, disliking 
food, thirst, limb pain, extreme weakness, wetness, 
epilepsy, caused by all doshas. This is easily healed 
with their antidotes. 

Evil spirit’s symptoms include laughing or crying 
without reason, and are caused by all three doshas. 
These occur rarely, but are hard to heal. 

3. Curses (are caused by all three doshas). 

4. Sorcery or Witchcraft (are caused by all three 
doshas). 

The last two types of spells rarely occur. Their 
symptoms include thirst and fainting, all signs of 
tridoshic fever and are hard to bear. The Ayurvedic 
practitioner ( vaidya) determines these last two fevers 

by, 

1. Observing the deed 

2. Hearing about the deed 

3. Through inference 

4. By healing the fever 

Sometimes eternal fevers remain exogenous. 
Sometimes they later become associated with the 
doshas. Its premonitory symptom is pain. Fever may 
occur first, then the symptoms, or vice versa. 

External Fever Therapies 

Spiritual therapies are used for externally caused 
fevers. These therapies include rites, rituals, good 
deeds, fasting, light meals, and herbal decoctions. 

Three Stages of Fever 

Three stages of a fever include, 

1. Association with ama (undigested foods) 

2. Metabolic transformation 

3. Non-association with ama. 


First Stage Fever Symptoms l 1 

With Ama) 

emaciation 

indigestion 

drowsiness 

body and 

abdominal 

heaviness 

heart feels 
impure/heavy 

constant 

temperature 

laziness 

salivation 

nausea 

acute attack 

rigidity 

numbness 

no 

hunger/taste¬ 

lessness 

unformed 

stool 

heavy 

stomach 

excessive 

urine 

no elimination of wastes, 
doshas , sweat 


During this stage, one is not to take naps, 
bath, massage, heavy foods, sexual intercourse, 
anger, wind, exercise, or astringent tastes. 


Second Stage Fever Symptoms (Pachyamana 


excess 

fever/thirst 

mucus in 

feces 

difficult 

breathing 

delirium 

giddiness 



Third Stage Fever Symptoms (Nirama) 



reduced temperature 

appetite 

elimination of 
doshas and wastes 

lightness 


These symptoms will generally 
appear by the eighth day 


Recovery From Fever 

Healing from fevers is easy when persons are 
strong, the dosha is mildly increased and there are no 
secondary complications (cima fevers). Symptoms of 
fevers with ama include excess urine, constipation 
or diarrhea, and loss of hunger. Fever, thirst, delirium, 
difficult breathing, dizziness, and nausea are 
symptoms of fever with heated doshas. Fevers that 
are long lasting, recurring after seven days or appear 
after fasts are fevers without ama. 













































Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 16: Infections/Wounds 


Remittent/Intermittent Fevers 
(Vishama Jwara) 

Doshas and Dhatus Fevers - Malarial Fevers 

Fevers are generally caused by all three doshas. 
However, due to one’s dosha, the fevers may manifest 
as described above in the various tissues (dhatus). 
After tridoshic fevers subside a slight residue of the 
deranged doshas and weakness exists. Through 
improper healing measures and poor diet, Vayu 
becomes vitiated and re-aggravated. Further, this can 
cause five fevers lodged in any or all of the five Kapha 
sites (stomach and intestines, the chest, throat, head, 
and joints). 

Modem medicine sees remittent fevers as different 
types of malarias caused by mosquitos (various 
species of plasmodium). The mosquitos infect the 
blood and act upon the red blood cells. These blood 
infections affect the various supporting elements of 
the tissues ( dhatus). Malaria is considered a parasitic 
infection, while typhoid is classified as a bacterial 
infection. 

Fevers of plasma, hemoglobin, muscle and fat are 
easy to heal. Bone and marrow fevers are more 
difficult to heal. The six fevers are 

1. Santata /wara/Plasma (Rasa) Fevers: This fever 
starts in the plasma (and sometimes in the other 
dhcitus), quickly spreading to the three doshas, seven 
dhatus, urine and feces. The fever is continuous and 
hard to tolerate. They are caused by rasa spreading 
the aggravated doshas throughout the body and are 
difficult to bear. If purified, Vayu fevers last for 7 or 
14 days, Pitta fevers last for 9 or 10 days and Kapha 
fevers last for 11 or 12 days. This fever is continuous 
due to the vitiated rasa spreading throughout the body. 
For all fevers of plasma origin, fasting is the first 
healing therapy. Various forms of this fever disappear 
for a day or two, then recur during their aggravating 
time of day and season. They last for another seven 
or 14 days. Recurrence is caused by improper 
convalescing and diet. 

Symptoms include heaviness, misery, anxiety, 
prostration, vomiting, anorexia, malaise, and 
yawning. 

2. Satata Jwara/Hc mog 1 obin (Rakta) Fevers: 

Vitiated doshas reside in the blood or hemoglobin, 


deranging the blood. These fevers are caused and 
develop according to the time of day or season. They 
appear twice within 24 hours; they can develop and 
become healed merely by the time of day or season, 
or by attending to the aggravated dhcitu or one’s 
prakriti (constitution) with appropriate therapies. 
(Sometimes called Santataka Jwara) 

Symptoms include blood, pimples, thirst, 
burning, discoloration, giddiness, intoxication, 
delirium. 

3. Anyedushka Jwara/M usclc (Mdmsa) Fevers : 

One’s prakriti, dhatus, the doshas, or seasons can 
cause the muscle channel (mcimsavaha srota) 
obstructions. These fevers occur once a day. 

Symptoms include burning thirst, 
unconsciousness, wetness, diarrhea, foul smell, body 
spasms. 

4. Trtlyaka Jwara/F at (Medas) Fevers : These are 
Vayu-caused fevers, which manifest every other day. 
(Symptoms of Vayu/Pitta predominant—sudden head 
pain, Vayu/Kapha predominate—sudden pain in the 
entire back, Kapha/Pitta predominant—sudden pain 
in the upper back or lumbo-sacral joint). 

Symptoms include excess sweat, thirst, delirium, 
frequent vomiting, disl ik e of one’s own body odor, 
wetness, anorexia. 

5. Chaturthaka Jwara! Marrow (Maiid). Bone 

<Asthi> and Fat (Medas): When the doshas are in the 
fat, marrow, and bones, fever occurs every fourth day, 
manifesting either with Vayu excess (beginning in 
the head), or Kapha excess (beginning in the calves). 
Some say only when doshas are in the marrow does 
fever occur every fourth day. 

Fevers caused by doshas simultaneously in bone 
and marrow are called Viparyaya Jwara, which is of 
three ki nds (one for each dosha). These fevers last 
for 2 days, disappear for a day and then reappear, 
continuing this cycle. 












The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Some authorities believe these three fevers are 
caused by afflictions of the previous alternate clhdtus 
(i.e., afflicted rakta dhcitu causes anyedyushka (fat) 
jwara; muscle afflictions cause tritlyaka (bone 
fevers); doshas in the fat ( medas) tissue cause 
chciturthcika (marrow) fever. 

Symptoms of bone fevers include diarrhea and 
vomiting, bone pains, unusual sounds, and body 
spasms. Symptoms of marrow fever include hiccup, 
asthma, bronchitis, dark vision, vital organ pains, 
outer coldness, and internal burning. 

6. Oias Nirodhaja: The life sap or ojas tissue 
(shukra dhatu) may also be blocked by Vayu and 
Pitta. Symptoms include shivering, numbness, 
unconsciousness, drowsiness, delirium, slight pain, 
and ejaculation. Vayu fevers appear every 7 days, Pitta 
fevers arise every 10 days, Kapha excess fevers appear 
every 12 days. 

Symptoms of Relief From Fever 

When fevers begin to be relieved, the doshas in 
the dhatus (tissues) create abnormalities and become 
liquefied. Persons begin to breathe heavily, sweat 
profusely, moan, vomit, and shake. They become 
delirious, have unusual body movements, experience 
heat and cold, become angry, have noisy, malodorous 
diarrhea, become pale, and lose consciousness. Fevers 
may leave suddenly or gradually. Certain fevers can 
produce anxiety, so persons must be treated with care. 
After the fever is healed the person gradually returns 
to a normal state of health. 

Fevers that heal suddenly are termed “healed by 
crises” in modern medicine. When persons take 
antibiotics to kill bacteria, viruses, etc., these 
pathogens are suddenly killed. When they die, they 
release various toxins into the bodily systems. The 
body reacts to this sudden release of toxins, and 
develops various disorders. (When fever is healed 
gradually the toxins are slowly released into the body, 
giving it time to adapt and excrete them). 

Symptoms of Healed Fever 

Fightness, normal functioning of the mind and 
senses, normal sweating, appetite, itching head, 
absence of exhaustion, delusion and heat, mouth 
ulcers, and discomfort. 


Therapies 

Remedy for All Fevers: 

Sudarshan Churna 

The Ayurvedic seers have created this formula for 
all fevers (intermittent and other dosha and dhatu 
fevers). This formula is a combination of 48 herbs 
(the main herb used is chirdyatd). Sudarshan churna 
is taken with cold water. On the right index finger of 
Ford Vishnu resides a powerful discus that destroys 
all kinds of enemies. It is called Sudarshan Chakra. 
Because this herbal remedy destroys all kinds of 
fevers, it was named after this discus or chakra. 
Sudarshan churna can even be used during the first 
stages of fevers. According to the experience of some 
modem Ayurvedic doctors, sudarshan chuma works 
best for the malarial (remittent) fevers; others prefer 
sitopaladi. 

Sitopaladi Churna 

For fevers associated with flus and respiratory 
disorders, sitopaladi churna works best. It is up to 
each modern practitioner to decide whether 
sudarshan or sitopaladi churna works better for the 
client. A recipe for typhoid or malaria (recurring 
fevers) is 1/2 tsp. sitopaladi churna with warm 
water—3 times daily for 8 weeks. The first 10 days 
one follows a liquid fast. Within 3 to 4 days, persons 
should feel better. After the 8-week program the fever 
will not occur. 

Thus, regardless of the type of fever (i.e., Vayu, 
Pitta, remittent, etc.), sudarshan and sitopaladi 
churnas are the only herbal therapies needed. De¬ 
pending on the doshais) causing the fever, persons 
are advised to follow the corresponding food and 
lifestyle guidelines that balance and maintain their 
health. 








Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 16: Infections/Wounds 


Abscesses (Vidradhi) 

Causes: Eating stale, very hot, and dry foods, (caus¬ 
ing burning during digestion); lying on an uneven 
bed, foods and life-styles that vitiate the blood. The 
doshas become aggravated and weaken the skin, 
muscles, fat, bones, ligaments, blood, and tendons, 
producing swelling in any one or several of them. 
This occurs either inside the body (with severe pain) 
or on the outer body. Abscesses are either round or 
wide. Six forms of abscesses exist: Vayu, Pitta, 
Kapha, Tridosha, blood, or trauma caused. 

Symptoms: 

External: Forming anywhere on the body, being 
difficult to bear, they are hard and raised. 

Internal: More difficult to bear, deep seated, hard, 
growing upwards (like an anthill), near the navel, 
urinary bladder, liver, spleen, heart, abdomen, groin, 
kidneys, or rectum. It is very serious. 

Vayu: Severe pain, blackish-red, takes a long time 
to grow, forming and discharging pus, irregularly 
placed, unevenly shaped, painful, cutting, rotating, 
spreading easily, gaseous, throbbing, and producing 
sounds. 

Pitta : Red, coppery or black, causing thirst, 
delusion, fever, burning, quick to grow, form, and 
discharge pus. 

Kapha: White, itching, with nausea, cold, sti ff ness 
of the body, excessive yawning, loss of taste, 
heaviness of the body, slow to grow, form, and 
discharge pus. 

Tridosha: Symptoms of all the doshas simulta¬ 
neously. 

Blood: Surrounded by black eruptions, blue 
colored, severe burning, pain, fever, and other 
symptoms of aggravated Pitta. It is external in all cases 
except those developing in the uterus. 

Trauma: Vayu becomes aggravated from the force 
of assault, unsuitable foods or lifestyle. It displaces 
the heat at the trauma site, aggravating Pitta, and 
causing symptoms of Pitta and blood. This causes 
the severest secondary complications. 

Depending upon the site of the abscess will de¬ 
termine the secondary symptoms. 


Abscess 

Complication 

near navel 

hiccup 

in bladder 

difficulty eliminating/foul 
smell 

in liver 

difficult breathing 

in spleen 

difficulty exhaling 

in pancreas 

thirst 

all over 
body 

sharp pain/ rigidity 

in heart 

great delusion, 
unconsciousness, cough, 
friction/pain in the heart 

on 

front/top 
of stomach 

pain/gurgling in upper 
abdomen, pain in ribs and 
shoulders 

in groin 

stiff thighs 

in kidneys 

sharp pain in waist and back, 
rib pain 

in rectum 

obstruction of gas 


The early, middle, and advanced stages of abscess 
development are similar to inflammatory edema. In 
the advanced stages of abscesses localized above the 
navel, they expel pus or blood through the mouth, 
and when present below the navel, discharges are 
through the rectum. 

The features of the doshas and of that which is 
exuded is similar to ulcers (rather than from trauma). 
Tridoshic abscesses in the heart, navel, urinary bladder 
and those that have burst after maturing (either inside 
or outside), are unable to be healed. Also, those that 
burst inside and expel their contents, those arising in 
debilitated persons, and those that have secondary 
complications cannot be healed. 



Therapies: These therapies are the same as for sinus 
(next section). 

,4? "Sfc. 
































































The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Sinus (Nadi-Vrana) 

If persons neglect abscesses or swellings sinus 
problems can develop. Five forms of ncidl exist: Vayu, 
Pitta, Kapha, Tridosha, and Shalyaja. 

Causes and Symptoms: 

Vayu: Rough, short-mouthed size, aching pain 
within the sinus, secreting a frothy matter, increasing 
by night with aching pain, thirst. 

Pitta : Lethargy, heat, piercing pain. Fever occurs 
at the beginning and there are large amounts of hot, 
yellow sinus secretions. Secretions develop more 
frequently during the night. 

Kapha: The sinus is hard, itching, and slightly 
painful or numb. An excess of thick, shiny, white 
colored pus secretions exist, and is expelled more at 
night. 

Dual and Tridosha: Symptoms of two or three 
doshas. Tridoshic symptoms are considered severe. 

Shlayaia: Foreign matter (e.g., dirt, bone, splinter, 
etc.) becoming fixed in a body part and still visible, 
opens the skin and creates a form of a sinus. 
Symptoms include constant pain, instant secretion 
of a sort of hot, bloody, frothy liquid matter. 

Therapies: 

General: In each case the therapy is three-fold. 
First antiseptics are used to wash the wound, then 
antibiotics cleanse and balance the doshas and finally 
healing measures are applied. 

Vayu: Constantly wash the ulcer with an herbal 
decoction of dashmul (i.e., an antiseptic). Sesame oil 
cooked with turmeric, katukd, bald, rock salt, myrrh, 
and hilwa are used to purify the ulcer by filling it 
with the medicated oil (i.e., antibiotic and dosha 
balancing). The lesion is constantly washed with a 
decoction of triphala, arnaltas, and milk . Finally oil 
cooked in neem, vidahga, chitrak, pippall, vachd, and 
mustard are applied to promote healing. [Ashtanga 
Hridayam therapy] 

Charak first uses herb poultices including garlic, 
cloves, chitrak, and pahchmula. Then the channels 
with pus are cut opened with a knife and bandaged 
with sesame paste and turmeric. A poultice is then 
applied of licorice, sesame, salt, and devadaru, 
dashmul, garlic, cloves, and chitrak. 


Pitta: According to Ashtanga, first the sinus is 
washed with herbal decoction of mahjishthd, arjuna, 
mango, and licorice for antiseptic purposes. Then a 
poultice of guduchl, licorice, and sesame paste is 
applied as an antibiotic and to heal the excess dosha. 
Finally, healing is effected by medicated ghee cooked 
in mi lk with herbs of mahjishthd, poppy seeds, vidarl 
kand, turmeric triphala, and licorice. [16 parts milk, 
to 4 parts ghee, to 1 part herbs (all combined)] 
Kapha: First, antiseptics are used in a decoction 
form. Herbs include neem, guduchl, mango leaves, 
and chitrak. Next, antibiotic therapy includes barley 
flour, turmeric, and sesame paste applied as a 
poultice. This purifies or balances the doshas. Finally, 
healing is achieved through a medicated oil of myrrh, 
chirdyatd, danti, black or sea salt, and trivrit. 
Tridosha: Will not respond to therapies. 

Shlayaia: First the foreign matter is removed, then 
the sinus is cleansed and purified with a plaster of 
sesame paste, raw honey, and ghee. Herbs are cooked 
into the oil (bilwa, musta, and other herbs used in 
the above Pitta therapy). 


Breast Abscess (Stana Vidradhi) 

In the same manner as described above, the 
doshas enter the open channels of the female breast 
during pregnancy or after delivery. They produce a 
hard swelling in the breasts (having features of 
external abscesses). This generally does not happen 
in young girls because the channels in their breasts 
are still small. 

Therapies are treated like vrana (ulcer), but 
without applying the warm poultice. Incision may 
be applied by qualified persons, being careful not to 
injure the milk ducts. 



















Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 16: Infections/Wounds 


Wounds (Vrana) 



Causes: Two types of wounds exist: internal and ex¬ 
ternal. Internal wounds are caused by excesses of the 
doshas. When Vayu, Pitta or Kapha becomes 
excessed and move to the external passages, they 
cause innate wounds. When external wounds are not 
able to be healed and have internal symptoms the 
same therapies as innate wounds are applied. 

Symptoms: 

Vayu: These wounds cause stiffness, are hard to the 
touch, slow to develop pus, have great and piercing 
pain, throbbing, and are black in color. 

Pitta : Thirst, confusion, fever, sweating, burning, 
impurity, tearing, malodorous, and pus-filled. 
Kapha: Slimy, heavy, oily, wet, with mild pain, 
pale, with slight fluid, and chronic. 

These two forms of wounds have 20 varieties, in- 
cisable/unincisable, defective/undefective, in vital 
parts/not in vital parts, open/closed, severe/mild, ooz- 
ing/non-oozing, poisoned/non-poisoned, even/uneven 
location, with/without pouch, and raised/depressed. 

Five variations of wounds exist: 

Defective wounds: Twelve types exist: white, nar¬ 
row or depressed passages, very wide passages, gray¬ 
ish, blue, black, red, numerous boils, difficult to heal, 
bottleneck shaped, and malodorous. 

Locations: Eight types, in the skin, blood vessels, 
flesh, fat, bone, ligaments, vital parts, and viscera. 
Discharges: Fourteen types, lymph, water, pus, blood, 
yellow oozing, reddish, brownish, ochre, blue, green, 
oily, rough, black, and white. 

Complications: Sixteen types, visarpa (erysipelas), 


paralysis, blood vessel blockages, tetanus, confusion, 
insanity, wound pain, fever, thirst, lockjaw, cough, 
vomiting, diarrhea, hiccup, difficult breathing, and 
trembling. 

Defects: Twenty types, preventing healing, moist 
ligaments, excess blood vessel fluid, deepness, with 
maggots, bone cracking, with foreign bodies, toxic, 
spreading, and scratches that produce tearing. Other 
types include, skin friction, hair friction, faulty 
bandage, over oiling, and emaciation from excess 
reduction therapy. Further types are, indigestion, over 
eating, eating incompatible foods, unsuitable foods, 
grief, anger, naps, excess exercise, insufficient 
exercise, and sex. 

Examination falls into three categories, 
Inspection: Noticing client’s age, complexion, body 
parts, sense organs, and touch. 

Questions: Asking about the cause of wounds, 
development, pain, and digestive power. 
Touch: Noting softness/hardness and coldness/ 
warmth. 

Healing is possible if the wound is in the skin or 
muscle when in an easy place to treat, when young, 
without complications, due to a wise patient, and if it 
is immediately tended to. Herbs include licorice, 
tagar, red sandalwood, jatamdnshi, turmeric, barberry, 
and kul. 

Therapies: 

General: First, emesis, purgation, enema, and 
surgery are used depending upon the doshas involved 
and the strength of the person. Wounds become 
quickly healed from these cleansing measures. 

Thirty-six Measures: These measures include anti¬ 
swelling, six surgeries, pressing, cooling, uniting, 
fomenting, pacifying, probing, cleansing, healing, 
detox paste, healing paste, cleaning oil, healing oil, 
leaves, bandages, diet, elevation/depression, 
cauterization, hard and soft aromas, hard and soft 
pastes, powders, colors, and healing. 

Inflammation —when seen as an initial sign, 
blood-letting prevents the wound from developing. 
Toxins are cleansed first (except Vayu caused wounds, 
which one needs to eat ghee and Vayu- reducing de¬ 
coctions) using the appropriate pahcha karma therapy. 
Paste of shatdvari, sandalwood, parched barley flour 





















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


mixed with ghee are useful to cool inflammations. If 
this is ineffective then the herbs are applied as a warm 
poultice (of parched barley flour and ghee), that rip¬ 
ens the wound. When it is ripe, it is pierced. If one 
has a delicate condition, then instead of piercing, lin¬ 
seed oil and guggul are applied to the wound to al¬ 
low it to open on its own. 

Operations —Six types of operations exist: 
incisions, puncturing, excision, scraping, scarification, 
and suturing. Incisions are used for sinuses, ripened 
inflammations, intestinal wounds or obstructions, 
swellings with foreign bodies inside. Puncture is 
useful for ascites, ripe and blood tumors, blood 
disorders, boils. Excision is applied to protruded 
wounds with thick margins, raised and hard, 
hemorrhoids. Scraping is done on leukoderma and 
other skin diseases. Scarification is performed on 
Vayu blood disorders, glands, pimples, urticarial 
rashes (i.e., burning, itching, stinging, smooth 
patches), red patches, skin diseases, injured parts, and 
swellings. Suturing is needed for bowels, abdomen, 
and other deep or invasive surgery. 

Pressing —any wound with a pouch or small 
opening is pressed with a paste of wheat flour and 
peas. Herbs include onion, archu, turmeric, guggul, 
and licorice. 

Cooling — bald paste or bald —water sprinkling 
is used when heat is present. For blood-related 
wounds, cold ghee or cold milk is applied. 

Long Wounds —paste of honey and ghee is evenly 
applied. Then mahjishthd, turmeric, neem, tulsl (holy 
basil), harltakl bark, and guggul are placed over this. 
A bandage is then wrapped over the wound. 

Small Wounds. Much Oozing. Pouchy —(not 
within vital parts), soft or hard probing is advised. 
Soft probes are soft plant stalks, hard probes are iron 
rods. Deep muscle probing also needs hot iron rods 
for cauterization. 

Odorous. Discolored. Much Oozing & Pain — 

These are said to be caused by uncleanliness. They 
need to be cleansed and kept clean with decoctions 
of triphald, bald and neem. Paste of sesame, salt, 
turmeric, and neem are also good cleansers. [Black, 
pale, painful, raised, and protruded (and not very red) 
wounds are considered already clean and not in need 
of cleansing.] 

Leaves & Bandages— arjuna. neem , and pippall 


leaves or sterile bandages are used to cover wounds. 

Depressed Wounds —galactogogues, vitalizers, 
and bulk promoting herbs (e.g., shatdvarl, 
ashwagandha, and shweta musali) are used to raise 
depressions. To depress raised wounds guggul, 
triphald, and castor oil are used. 

Excess Hemorrhaging—(after e xcision) tumors, 
Kapha nodules, glands, stiffness and Vayu disorders, 
wounds with pus or lymph, deep and firm, 
cauterization is needed. 

Fractured Bones/Dislocated Joints —after the 
bone or joint is set, herbs of aloe, guggul, and lodhra 
are applied as a paste and bandaged (dipped in ghee). 
Then the bone or joint is immobili z ed with splints, 
casts, etc. Pitta-reducing foods are eaten. Other 
complications are also to be tended to. 

Vayu (Dry, Pain, Stiff): Massage, fomentation, bolus, 
poultices, and ointments with ghee, milk, and bald, 
guduchl, and shatdvarl, sprinkling with dashmul, 
ingesting ghee and sesame oil. 

Vayu with Burning and Pain: Warm paste of linseed 
and sesame oil, dipped in milk, roasted barley flour. 
Herbs used include mahjishthd, neem , and onion. 

Pitta: Oils, paste and water sprinkling using cold, 
sweet and bitter herbs (sandalwood, licorice, bald, 
vidahga, kutaj, triphald, musta, cardamom), sesame 
oil and ghee, ingesting ghee and purgation. A Pitta- 
reduction diet (i.e., no salt, hot, sour, pungent, heavy 
or burning foods or drinks) and no sexual intercourse, 
in order to heal these disorders. Cool foods and drinks, 
naps, and rest are also useful healers. 

Kapha: Oil and water sprinkling with astringent, 
pungent, hot, and rough herbs; emesis and other 
reduction therapies, digestive herbs. 




















Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 16: Infections/Wounds 


Inflamed Ulcers (Dvivraniya) 

Causes: Ulcers fall under two categories, internal and 
external. 

Internal: Causes may be due to excesses of blood, 
Vayu, Pitta, Kapha, or Tridosha. 

External: Causes are due to bites from animals, 
accidents, and injuries, poisons, etc. Cooling therapies 
are immediately used to cool the expanding heat of 
the ulcer. This heat is Pitta related and may be pacified 
with a mixture of honey and ghee applied directly on 
the wound for 1 week. After that, the appropriate 
internal therapies are followed. 

Symptoms: Sixteen forms of ulcers exist. Pain is 
associated with each, while specific symptoms vary 
from form to form. 

Vayu: Brown or bright red, cold, thin, and slimy 
secretions, tension, throbbing, pricking, and piercing 
pain inside the ulcer, and feeling of expansion. 

Pitta: Bluish-yellow, grows quickly, burning, oozing, 
redness, and surrounded by small yellow pustule 
eruptions. 

Kapha: Gray, extended, raised around the 
circumference, itching, thick, compact, covered by 
vessels and membranes, slightly painful, hard, cold, 
thick, white, and slimy secretions. 

Blood: Looks lik e a lump of red coral, surrounded 
by black vesicles and pustules, malodorous, painful, 
feels lik e fumes rise from it, bleeding, and other Pitta 
symptoms. 

Vdyu/Pitta: Red or bright red, pricking and burning 
pain, feels lik e fumes rise from it, bright red or bluish 
yellow secretions. 

Vdyu/Kapha: Itching, piercing pain, heavy, hard or 
callused, constant exuding of cold, slimy secretions. 
Pitta/Kapha: Heavy, hot, yellow, burning, pale, or 
yellow secretion. 

Vayu/Blood: Dry, thin, piercing pain, loss of sensation, 
blood, or bright red secretions. 

Pitta/Blood: The color of the surface cream of ghee, 
fishy smell, spreads, hot, and blackish secretions. 
Kapha/Blood: Red, heavy, slimy, glossy, hard or cal¬ 
lused, itching, or bloody yellow secretions. 

Vayu/Pitta/Blood: Throbbing, pricking and burning 
pain, thin yellowish bloody secretions, with sensa¬ 
tion, and feeling l ik e fumes arise. 


Vayu/Kapha/Blood: Itching, throbbing, tingling, thick, 
gray, and blood-streaked secretions. 
Pitta/Kapha/Blood: Redness, itching, pus forming, 
burning, thick, gray,l and bloody secretions. 
Tridosha: Various pains, secretions, and colors asso¬ 
ciated with all three doshas. 
Vayu/Pitta/Kapha/Blood: Burning and piercing pains, 
throbbing, itching, complete loss of sensation, red¬ 
ness, pus forming, various colors, pains, and secre¬ 
tions common to all doshas and the blood. 
Shuddha-vrana: (clean ulcer) Ulcers that are the same 
color as the back of the tongue, smooth, painless, 
soft, shiny, well shaped, and without secretions. 

Therapies: Sixty therapies and surgical methods exist, 
including fasting and light meals, plastering, irrigation 
or spraying, anointing, fomentation, massage, large 
and small poultices, inducing oozing, draining. Other 
therapies are internal intake of oils and ghee, emesis, 
and purgatives. Surgical methods include excision, 
opening abscesses, bursting, scraping, extraction, 
probing, vein puncturing, inducing discharge, suturing 
adhesion, and pressing. 

Further methods include stopping bleeding, 
cooling, suturing, decoction washes, plugs, pastes, 
external ghee and oils, internal herbal use, dusting 
and mbbing with herbs. Other methods are, growing 
hairs, fumigation, raisings, destroying, softening, 
hardening, caustics, cauterization, blackening, and 
healing with scars. Additional methods include 
burning (cauterization), enemas, urethral and vaginal 
injections, bandaging, leaf application, vermifuges, 
rejuvenatives, disinfectants, and shiro virechana 
(nasal evacuation). Further therapies are, snuff, 
gargling or holding herbs in the mouth, smoking, 
honey /ghee, yantras (physical therapy machines), 
nutrition, and protection from malicious spirits. 


























The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Discussed here are the more common internal ulcers 
that inflame the stomach’s tissue lining. Usually they 
are Pitta disorders causing pain, burning, or bleeding. 
They are most commonly caused by stress, worry, 
working too hard, spicy and sour foods, alcohol, and 
smoking. 


Lateral displacement: (vivartitam) Symptoms are pain 
and uneven joint setting. 

Dislodged Bone: (adha-kshiptam) Excruciating pain, 
dislocated bone looseness, and hanging from the joint 
can develop. 


General: Bland diet, whole grains, digestible foods, 
mi lk fast (if one is strong). Nightshades (e.g., toma¬ 
toes, eggplants, white potatoes), citrus fruit (lemons, 
limes and grapefruits), and bananas are avoided. 
Herbs to soothe the mucus lining include aloe gel, 
shatdvarl, and bald. Also useful is pravdl pishti, 
shankh bhasma (conch shell ash), and sukti bhasma 
(sea shell ash). 

Vdyu: Vayu-reducing foods, liquids, herbs and spices. 
Pitta : Pitta-reducing foods, aloe, barberry, katukd, 
dmalaki, and chirdyatd. 

Kapha: These conditions may be caused by emo¬ 
tional issues l ik e sadness, greediness, or attachment. 
Herbs include hot and pungents like trikatu and 
cloves. 


tion, looseness, abnormal projection, 
lateral and oblique dislocation. 
Twelve types of fractures exist. 

Dislocation Symptoms: 

General: Persons experience loss of movement, 
extension, flexibility, rotation, and painful when 
moved or touched. 

Joint Friction: (utplishtam) This is due to two joint 
extremities causing swelling on either side of the joint. 
Various pains are felt at night. 


Abnormal Projection: (ati-kshiptam) The dislocated 
bone moves away from the joint and is very painful. 

Oblique Dislocation: (tiryak-kshiptam) Projection or 
displacement of bone on one side causes unbearable 
pain. 

Fracture Symptoms: (Kanda-bhagnam) 

General: Symptoms include violent swelling around 
the seat of the fracture, throbbing, pulsation, abnormal 
position of the fractured limb with unbearable pain 
when touched. Other experiences include cracking 
sounds when pressure is applied, looseness of limb, 
various pains, and discomfort in all positions. 

The most difficult to heal are impacted, drooping, 
severed, and shattered fractures. Also, displacement 
or looseness in children or in very old or weak persons, 
those suffering from asthma, skin problems, or 
kshata-kshina (lung abscess or injury) are difficult to 
heal. 

Symptoms that cannot be healed include pelvic 
bone fracture or dislocation, compound fracture of 
thigh or skull flat bones. Other unhealable symptoms 
include frontal bone fractures (into small pieces) or 
dislocation, simple breast bone, back bone, temporal 
and cranial bone fractures. 

Bulging: (Karkatam) Pressing or bending the 
fractured bone at its two joint extremities causes 
bulging at the middle of the fracture, resembling a 
knot. 

Upward Projection: (ashvakarnam) Symptoms 
include an upward protmsion and looks l ik e the ear 
of a horse. 



Bone Fractures and Joint Dislocations 
(Bhagnam and Sandhi Mukti) 

Causes: This is due to falling, pres¬ 
sure, blow, violent jerking, or bites. 
Six forms of dislocations exist: fric¬ 


Looseness: (vishlishtam) Symptoms include slight 
swelling with constant pain, and poor functioning of 
the joint. 


Shattered Fragments: (chumitam) Palpitations and 
cracking sounds develop. 


Smashed Bones: (pichitam) Large swellings appear. 
























Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 16: Infections/Wounds 


Splintered: (asthi-challitam) The bone covering or skin 
(periosteum) is splintered off. 

Compound Fracture: (kanda-bhagnam) Bones that 
are completely broken, broken in several places, or 
several bones projecting through the s ki n are these 
symptoms. 

Impacted Fracture: (majjanugatam) A fragment or 
broken bone pierces the bone, digging out the marrow. 
Drooping: (ati-patitam) The fractured bone droops 
or hangs. 

Arched: (vakram) The unloosened bone is bent, 
forming an arch. 

Severed: (chinnam) One joint extremity of the bone 
is severed. 

Holes : (patitam) A slight fracture is pierced with many 
holes with excruciating pain. 

Greenstick Fracture: (sphutitam) Cracked, swollen, 
pain, and prickliness develop. 

Bending of gristle or cartilage is called a fracture, 
long bones are usually severed, skull bones are 
generally cracked, teeth are usually splintered off. 

Therapies: 

All dislocations or fractures are manually 
manipulated to replace bones in their proper position 
and then bandaged. 

Bandaging: Fractures are dressed and bandaged 
weekly during the winter, every fifth day during spring 
and autumn, and every fourth day in the summer. The 
affected area is first covered with a piece of linen 
soaked in ghee, then the splint is applied and properly 
bandaged. Bandages are made neither too loose nor 
too tight. 

Flealing fractures or dislocations is difficult when 


they occur in Vayu doshas, in the over-indulging 
person and in one who eats too little. Fractures are 
also difficult to heal in those who have fever, 
abdominal distention, suppress urine or stool (and 
similar disorders). Fractures in young persons, those 
with only slight imbalances of the doshas or in the 
winter are easily healed within 1 month. Flealing in 
mid-life takes 2 months, while elderly people require 
3 months to heal. 

Salt, acidic, pungent and alkaline foods and spices 
need to be avoided. Rest, shade oily foods and drinks, 
and other Vayu-decreasing foods and habits need to 
be followed. Foods include rice, ghee, or boiled milk. 
Herbs include mahjishthci, red sandalwood, shatavan, 
flaxseed, horsetail, Solomon’s seal, and comfrey, and 
may be taken internally (every morning with ghee) 
and used as an external plaster. 

Herbs of the nyagrodhcidi group are used for 
bandaging and washing. Herbs in this group include 
licorice, lodhra, pipal tree, guggul (salai tree), Indian 
persimmon (tincluka/temru), mango, arjuna, and 
haritaki. The tree bark of each of these herbs is used. 

Washing: A cold decoction of the above herbs is used 
to wash the fractured part. When pain is great, 
dashmul or mahanarayan oil (oil is warmed in the 
winter) are applied to the fracture. If the fracture has 
ulcerated complications, astringent herbs mixed with 
honey and ghee are also used (such as raspberry, 
amalaki, arjuna, and musta). Crushed or dislocated 
joints are not shaken. Cold washes, plasters and oils 
are used. 

Ghee: Is first used on fractures and dislocations 
before they are reset. 


Discrimination, courage, strong will and knowledge of the soul etc. are the ideal therapies for the mind. 

Ashtanga Hridayam Su. Ch. 1: ver. 26 

















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 




J MjdxrLcmljcjCLL § 7 It-IlLIlA- 







Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 17: Respiratory System 


Modem science is based on the study of physical principles to conquer nature. 
Ayurveda requires deep spiritual insight in order to live in harmony with natures. 

Anonymous 


Chapter 17: Respiratory System 

Cough, Breathing Disorders, Asthma, Hiccup, TB, Cold 


Cough (Kasa) 

Introduction: 

here are 5 ki nds of coughs: Vayu, Pitta, 
Kapha, those caused by lung injury, and 
those caused by wasting (i.e., pulmonary 
tuberculosis). 

Premonitory Signs: Throat irritation, loss of taste or 
appetite, thorny feeling in the throat. 

Development: When the downward movement of 
Vayu (Apdna) is obstructed, it begins to move up¬ 
ward to the chest and throat, and eventually to the 
head. This affects the eyes, back, chest, ribs, and even¬ 
tually comes out the mouth as a cough. 

Vayu Cough: As the accumulation of Vayu in¬ 
creases into aggravation, dryness is produced in the 
chest, throat, mouth, ribs, heart, and head. The dry 
air also causes delusion, mental agitation, loss of 
voice, and results in a dry cough with violent bouts, 
great pain, noise, and hair standing on end. A dry spit 
may be coughed out, which reduces the coughing 
fits. 

Pitta Cough: Yellow color in the eyes and mu¬ 
cus, a bitter taste in the mouth, fever, dizziness, vom¬ 
iting of bile and blood, thirst, hoarseness, fumes emit¬ 
ted from the mouth, acidity, and continuous cough¬ 
ing that makes persons stare upwards. 

Kapha Cough: Mild pain in the chest, head, and 
heart region; heaviness, throat coating, debility, runny 
nose, vomiting, loss of appetite and taste, hair stand¬ 
ing on end; thick, sticky, white, or clear mucus is ex¬ 
pelled. 

Lung In jury Cough: From trauma caused by fight¬ 


ing, or strenuous activities. Vayu becomes increased, 
mixes with Pitta, and produces coughs. Symptoms 
include large amounts of yellow or black blood mixed 
with mucus. It is dry, nodular, and foul smelling. 

Severe pain is present in the throat, chest (i.e., 
feeling l ik e pricking needles), joints, and ribs. Other 
symptoms include fever, difficult breathing, thirst, 
hoarseness, tremors, and cooing sounds. Strength or 
vigor steadily diminishes. One’s digestion and de¬ 
sire for eating is reduced, and poor complexion de¬ 
velops. Persons become emaciated, and there is blood 
in the urine, with sharp back and waist pains. 

Wasting Cough: This is caused by all the doshas, 
but mainly Vayu. Mucus is putrefied, pus-like, yel¬ 
low, foul smelling, and is green or red. The ribs and 
heart feel as though sliding and falling down, and an 
unreasonable desire for hot or cold comforts devel¬ 
ops. Persons overeat but still lose strength. The face 
is oily, yet has a pleasing radiant look and glittering 
eyes. Once this symptom appears, tuberculosis gradu¬ 
ally begins to develop. If a person is emaciated, or if 
tuberculosis (kshayaja) lingers for a long time, it is 
considered harmful. If aggressively treated with all 
the appropriate measures during the early stages, a 
person can be completely cured. 

If one dosha is the cause of any of these 3 types of 
coughs, the illness can be healed. If two doshas cause 
any of these coughs, the illness can be controlled. If 
unattended, dosha-caused coughs lead to lung injury 
resulting in TB. 

Therapies 

Vayu: When persons are undernourished, 
excess Vayu is reduced with ghee, oil enemas, a 















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


wholesome diet including basmati rice, whole wheat, 
barley gruel (with bilwa, ginger, dashmul, chitrak, 
jaggery, and black salt), warm and moist vegetables, 
and sesame oil. Persons should drink boiled milk, 
las si (1/2 yogurt to 1/2 water), or sour fruit juices— 
all mixed with sugar cane. 

Ghee should be mixed with Vayu-reducing herbs 
including ashwagandha, ginger, pippali, licorice, 
calamus, vidahga, black salt, chitrak, dashmul, 
kapikachhu, bald, guduchi, triphald, trikatu, 
gokshura, and shatdvari. These herbs promote 
digestion and reduce coughs. Raw honey and cane 
sugar can also be mixed with the herbs and barley. 
[Traditional texts speak of barley as reducing Vayu; 
however, modem experience indicates most Vayu 
doshas find that barley causes gas. If needed white 
basmati rice is an easily digested and nutritious 
substitute.] 

Other therapies include massage, water sprinkling, 
oil fomentations, snuff, and smoking Vayu- and 
Kapha-reducing herbs. For constipation and gas 
retention, enemas should be administered. Ghee 
should be taken before meals if there is upper body 
dryness. 

Smoking (Herbs): Relieves coughs that cannot be 
helped by ingesting herbs and foods. Herbal smoke 
includes musta, bald, black pepper, cardamom, 
vamsha lochana, ginger, ashwagandha, and haritaki. 
This also relieves Kapha-caused coughs. 

Vayu with phlegm: Vidahga, ginger, pippali, asa- 
foetida, black salt, barley powder, with ghee. 

Pitta: Castor oil purgation is useful. 

Pitta with phlegm: Emesis with ghee, licorice, and 
sugar cane. After the doshas are cleansed and 
balanced, one takes Pitta-reducing foods and liquids 
(cold and sweet properties). 

Thin phlegm: Sugar cane is mixed with emesis 
formula. Foods and liquids are oily and cold, including 
barley, green dal, and ghee. Herbs include lotus seeds, 
pippali, musta, licorice, fresh ginger, dry ginger, 
dmalaki, sandalwood, bibhitaki, vamsha lochana, 
gokshura, mixed with ghee, sugar cane, and honey. 

Thick phlegm : Bitter herbs and vegetables are 
mixed with emesis formula. Dry and cold foods and 
drinks are recommended. Neem and raw honey are 
added to the above herbs. Grape juice mixed with 


sugar cane, sugar cane water, and milk, should be 
drunk. 

Chest Wound and Wasting Cough with burning 

and fever: Boiled milk with shatdvari, bald, and 
licorice. 

Chest Wound, Wasting: Ghee with boiled milk, 
shatdvari, cane sugar, pippali, vamsha lochana, black 
pepper, turmeric, karkata shringi, and chabchini. 

Kapha: First, administer an emetic (if persons are 
strong) with barley and pungent herbs like pippali; 
then, a castor oil purgation. Foods should be light, 
including vegetable soup, radish, and pippali, and a 
little ghee, sesame oil, mustard oil, and bilwa fruit. 
After eating, drink raw honey, sour drinks (e.g., 
dmalaki juice), hot water, or las si (1/4 yogurt to 3/4 
water). Herbs should include sugarcane, sandalwood, 
vdsdk, tulsi, apdmdrga, dmalaki, musta, hantaki, 
calamus, bald, tnkatu, vidahga, chitrak, punarnavd, 
dmlavetasa, gokshura, ginger, and black pepper 
mixed with raw honey. 

Another recipe includes 10 gms. (.35 oz.) of 
pippali fried in canola oil mixed with cane sugar or 
rock candy. 

Smoking: Herbs are the same as for Vayu ( musta, 
bald, black pepper, cardamom, vamsha lochana, 
ginger, ashwagandha, haritaki, chakramarda). 

KaphcWdyu: Pippali, ginger, musta, haritaki, 
dmalaki, and rock candy, made with honey and ghee. 
(Sesame oil can be used for Pitta cough.) Dry and 
oily foods and drinks are used for wet and dry 
symptoms, respectively, to balance these conditions. 

Kapha/Pitta: Pitta-reducing herbs (i.e., bitters) 
and vdsdk, turmeric, vamsha lochana, cardamom, and 
honey are recommended. 

Chest Wounds: Sweet and vitalizing herbs such 
as shatdvari and sugar cane. Also pippali, boiled milk, 
barley and wheat flours, dmalaki, sesame oil, ghee, 
and honey are helpful. Therapies for chest wounds 

generally follow the Pitta-pacifying regime. 





















Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 17: Respiratory System 


If physical pain from Vayu and Pitta exists, ghee 
massage is useful. The chest is warmed with a hot, 
dry cloth, and massaged with medicated oil. 

Should Vayu cause the spitting of blood with burn¬ 
ing sensation, along with heart or side pain, ghee, 
mixed withrejuvenatives (e.g., shatavarl), vdsdk, and 
durba, is recommended. For any bleeding complica¬ 
tions, ghee is ingested and used as nasal oil (Tuber¬ 
culosis is usually accompanied by bleeding.). 

When the wound is healed but Kapha remains in 
the chest and head, causing coughing fits, one smokes 
ashwagandha, bald, and ginger with sugar cane juice. 

Emaciation: Wholesome, restorative foods (e.g., 
basmati rice gruel) and herbs include tripluilb, chitrak, 
pippall, ginger, guduchl, calamus, shatavarl, with 
black salt, and ghee. Grape juice is also advised. Herbs 
l ik e cardamom are also used to strengthen digestion. 
When one is strong, but still has excesses of the 
doshas, mild oil purgation is useful ( triphald and ghee, 
or castor oil). 

Other recipes'. Ghee cooked in grape juice with 
hantakl, musta, ginger, black pepper, and pippall; 
ghee and dmalakl boiled in milk, and pomegranate 
juice with cane sugar. 

For thirst, boiled milk is given. With diminished 
Pitta and Kapha, ghee, boiled milk, and bald are used. 
For dysuria or urine discoloration, boiled milk with 
ghee, vidbrl kand, and gokshura are used. For pain 
and swelling in the penis, anus, hip, and groin, oil 
enemas with a little ghee are used. 

The ashes of metals and gems (bhasmas) are 
widely used in India for rapid healing. Iron ash (loha 
bhasma) is suggested to regain strength from wast¬ 
ing and emaciation quickly. Abhrak, pravdl and mukta 
bhasmas are also useful. 

As with all diseases, therapy depends upon the 
aggravating dosha. 



Difficult Breathing (Shvasa) 

[including asthma] 

Causes: Difficult breathing arises from many factors, 
from increases of cough, dosha aggravation, diarrhea 
owing to indigestion, vomiting, poisons, anemia, 
fever, allergies, smoke, breeze, injury to vital organs, 
and drinking very cold or ice water. There are five 
types of difficult breathing. 

Development: When movement of Vayu is obstructed 
by Kapha, it spreads in all directions and vitiates the 
channels of respiration (prana), water (udaka), and 
food (anna). The obstruction rises from the stomach 
(i.e., the origin site of Kapha) into the chest, causing 
difficult breathing. 

Premonitory Signs: Pain in the heart and ribs, upward 
respiratory movement (of prana), gas, splitting temple 
pain, heaviness in the throat and chest, astringent taste 
in the mouth, and abdominal rumbling. 

Symptoms of the Five Types: 

1. Exertion (kestrel shvasa): Caused by exertion 
or overeating. It is not serious, subsiding after rest or 
digestion. 

2. Bronchial Asthma (tamaka shvasa): Aggravated 
Vayu begins to move upwards in the respiratory 
channel (Prdnavaha srotas), aggravating Kapha, 
making it difficult to breathe. Sharp pains in the head, 
neck, chest, and ribs appear. Coughs may be 
experienced with cracking sounds, delusion, loss of 
taste or appetite, mnny nose, and thirst. Heaviness or 
forced breathing may develop, causing distress and 
loss of consciousness. Expectorants bring temporary 
comfort, but there is difficulty breathing when lying 
down (or sitting). Eyes are wide and gaze upward, 
sweating develops on the forehead, and the mouth 
becomes dry. Persons desire hot things, and develop 
tremors or shivering. Breathing becomes more 
difficult on cloudy days, after drinking cold water, 
from cold breezes or direct wind, when eating Kapha- 
increasing foods. (Another form of this asthma is 
associated with fever and fainting. It is resolved by 
cold foods, drinks, and air.) Overall, bronchial asthma 
may be healed if treated when it first arises, otherwise 
it is only controllable. 

The latter 3 types may also be healed if treated in 











The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


the early stages 

3. Cheyne-stokes (chinna shvasa): When 
interrupted breathing with sharp pain develops (i.e., 
extreme pain similar to the pain of inj ury to vital points 
(marma), vital organ pain occurs along with sweating, 
fainting, gas, burning sensations, and urinary stones. 
Eyes gaze downward, are unsteady and teary; one 
eye is red. Coma, dry mouth, erratic speech, feeling 
of helplessness, and loss of complexion can also 
develop. 

4. Mahd shvasa: Heavy breathing, feeling 
helpless, breathing noises, continuous high-pitched 
sounds, loss of common sense and intelligence, 
unsteady eyes and face, constricted chest, blocked 
urine and stool, broken voice, dry throat, frequent 
delusions, severe pain in ears, temples, and head. 

5. Urclhva shvasa: Prolonged exhalations with 
inability to inhale, mucus lines the mouth and throat, 
eyes gaze upward, rolling and terrified, severe pain, 
inability to speak (owing to the pain in the vital organ). 

Specific Dosha Symptoms 
Vayu: Dry cough, wheezing, dry skin, dry mouth, 
thirst, constipation, desiring warm liquids, anxiety. 
Attacks happen mainly at dawn or dusk. 

Pitta: Wheezing and coughing with yellow 
phlegm, sweating, irritability, fever, desiring cold air. 
Attacks happen mainly at noon or midnight. 

Kapha: Wheezing and coughing with excess clear 
or white phlegm, lung fluid, rattling sounds. Attacks 
mainly develop in the morning and evening. 

Therapies: 

General: Bronchodilators, such as lobelia and 
ephedra, quickly open breathing passages. Long-term 
use can be depleting for Pitta and Kapha, and 
immediately weakening for Vayu. Tridoshic herbs 
include luirltaki, bald, and saffron. Each person must 
follow their appropriate dosha diet. 

After attacks, the lungs must be strengthened with 
tonics like chyavan prdsh, bald, ahwaganclhd, 
haritald, and brdhml. Rebuilding the lungs in this way 
can help prevent future attacks. 

For difficult breathing associated with 

Vayu: Ghee and pippali, vamsha lochana, and 
guggul; lemon or lime juice. 


Vayu/Pitta: Milk, ghee, rice water, bibhitaki, vdisdk, 
and trikatu. 

Pitta: Ghee, vdsdk, vamsha lochana, ginger, pippali, 
brdhml, and kaishore guggul. 

Pitta/Kapha: Vdsdk, pippali, guggul, kaishore 
guggul, and honey. 

Kapha: Vdsdk, pippali, ashwagandha, guggul, and 
honey. Apply a mustard paste to the chest. 

Kapha/Vayu: Emesis and purgation, including herbs 
that reduce these doshas. 


Hiccup (Hikka) 

There are 5 kinds of hiccup. Their causes, 
premonitory symptoms, kinds, and development are 
the same as diseases of difficult breathing. 

Type 1. Food-caused (annajd hikka): Vayu 
becomes aggravated by eating too quickly and 
improperly, or eating and drinking dry, penetrating, 
rough, and unaccustomed foods. This produces a 
painless hiccup. It is quiet, then followed by sneezing. 
It ceases when foods and drinks that one may be 
accustomed to are ingested. 

Type 2. Exertion-caused (kshudrd hikka): Vayu 
becomes mildly increased from exertion. This causes 
a slight hiccup from the base of the shoulders. It ceases 
after eating food. 

Type 3. Indigestion-caused (yamala kihhd): This 
type arises when one hasn’t eaten for many hours or 
when digestion is not working properly. These hiccups 
come in pairs, causing tremors in the head and neck, 








Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 17: Respiratory System 


gas, severe thirst, nonsensical speech, vomiting, 
diarrhea, unsteady eyes, and yawning. 

Type 4. (mahati hikka): Rigidity develops in the 
eyebrows and sides of neck, eyes become red and 
teary, there is loss of body movements, speech, 
memory, and awareness. Food is obstructed from 
moving, causing the vital organs to feel like they have 
been hit. The body bends backwards and emaciation 
develops. These types of hiccups arise from deep 
inside the body, forcefully, with great sounds. 

Type 5 (gambhira hikka): This hiccup begins either 
in the colon or in the navel region. Symptoms are 
similar to Type 4, but with more yawning, body 
expansion, and vibrating sounds. 

Hiccups caused by food and exertion are most 
easily healed. Severe hiccups should be taken 
seriously. 

Therapies: For both difficult breathing and hiccup 
oil and sweat (ncidl, bolus or steam tent—see Chap¬ 
ter 7) are required. First, persons undergo an oil mas¬ 
sage with black salt (with Pitta constitution) When 
there are Pitta problems, such as burning, excessive 
bleeding or sweating, weakness and tissue depletion, 
or pregnancy, black salt should not be used. Oil loos¬ 
ens and dissolves the thick phlegm blocking the 
breathing channels, softening them, and rebalancing 
Vayu. 

Afterwards, a light diet of basmati rice and ghee 
or sesame oil is taken to increase Kapha. Then one is 
ready for emesis with pippali, rock salt, and honey 
(reducing Kapha and Vayu). After emesis releases 
the excess Kapha, the channels are cleared, and the 
Vayu begins to flow properly. Should there be any 
remaining Kapha, turmeric and barley grain are mixed 
with ghee and smoked. 

When either of these illnesses are associated with 
a weak voice, diarrhea, internal bleeding, or burning, 
one eats foods that are sweet, oily, and cold. 

Short periods of fomentation are applied to the chest 
and throat. Warm oil is mixed with cane sugar, or 
poultices are made with sesame and whole wheat, 
Vayu-reducing herbs, foods, sour herbs (e.g., 
amalaki), and milk are ingested. Other herbs include 
dashmul, pippali, trikatu, bald, chitrak, dry ginger, 
gokshura, gucluchi, black salt; along with yogurt, 


ghee, dry radish, ghee, rice, and barley. Dashmul also 
removes complications of thirst. 

A general herbal recipe includes bilwa, 
gokshura, gucluchi, bala, trikatu, chitrak, pippali, 
ginger decoction with ghee, black pepper, and black 
salt. 

If a strong fever with toxins (ama) develops, 
reduction therapy (lahgana) is used (i.e., pahcha 
karma, exercise, sun bathing, etc.). Emesis with salt 
water is especially useful. 

Should these therapies cause a Vayu excess, 
balanced can be regained through Vayu-reducing 
foods and warm massage. 

If gas, distention, and constipation develop owing 
to Vayu, foods with black salt, amlavetasa, or 
hihgwastak are recommended. 

Hiccup is predominated by Kapha, and is healed 
through emesis, purgation, a wholesome diet, and 
pacification therapy, using herbal smoking (for strong 
persons only). 

When weak children or elderly persons develop 
excess Vayu, oil therapies are used to reduce excess 
air. It is important not to use laxatives when there is 
not an excess of Kapha. To do so may dry up the vital 
organs and threaten the person. 

See difficult breathing section (page 411) for spe¬ 
cific dosha therapies. 

For hiccup, ghee mixed with triphald, or castor oil 
quickly stops the situation. Suddenly sprinkling cold 
water on persons with hiccups is helpful. Slowly 
drinking water nonstop for 30 seconds or until the 
hiccups cease is another option. Other therapies 
include frightening or causing surprise, anger, 
exhilaration, or separation from loved ones. 

All foods and herbs should simultaneously reduce 
excess Kapha and Vayu. Ghee is used in all situations. 







The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Pulmonary Tuberculosis 
(Raja-yakshma) 

[and other wasting diseases] 

Mythology: Chandra, the moon, was married to the 
28 daughters of Daksha Prajapati, but he favored 
only one of the daughters, Rohini. Having exhausted 
and emaciated himself by depleting his ojas (life sap) 
through sensual pleasures with this one woman, he 
had no strength to satisfy the remaining ladies. Their 
father, Daksha became angry and caused the moon 
to develop tuberculosis. The moon soon apologized 
and was forgiven by Daksha, who sent the two 
celestial physicians (Ashwins) to heal him with soma 
nectar (restoring his ojas). 

Causes: The Sanskrit word, Raja yakshmadi, means 
king of the diseases. There are four causes of Raja 
yakshmadi: 

1) sudden or excessive exertion or chest wound, 

2) suppression of any of the 13 natural urges (e.g., 
urine, feces, flatulence, etc.), 

3) excessive loss of semen (shukra), life sap/tissue 
essence (ojas), or tissue lubrication (sneha) 
[pratilomak diabetes—depletion of dhatus] 

4) improper nutrition [anulomak diabetes— 
depletion of dhatusj. All forms of TB are caused by 
the simultaneous excess of all three doshas. 

Development: Owing to any of the above causes, 
Vayu overwhelms the chest, deranging Kapha and 
Pitta. This vitiated Vayu then spreads throughout the 
body to all the body joints, veins, and plasma 
channels. These increases spread in all directions (i.e., 
up, down, sideways), excessively constricting or 
dilating their channels. Thus, disease is created. 

1) Vayu in the joints causes yawning, malaise, and 
fever. Vayu in the stomach and small intestine pro¬ 
duce anorexia, palpitations, cardiac pain, and other 
chest disorders. When Vayu aggravates the throat, 
irritations and hoarseness develop. When the chan¬ 
nels through which vital air flows through are affected, 
breathing is difficult and persons feel cold. When the 
head is affected, head disorders develop. Constant 
coughing causes chest injury, irregular Vayu move¬ 
ment, and throat irritation. If coughing continues, the 
chest can be further injured. This weakens the per¬ 


son even more. These complications cause emacia¬ 
tion, developing weight loss, wasting of muscles, loss 
of appetite, and debility. 

2) By suppressing natural urges of gas, urine, and 
feces (owing to bashfulness, disgust, or fear), Vayu 
becomes superabundant, and while mixed with Pitta 
and Kapha, move in all directions. As Vayu moves to 
the bones, stomach, etc. (as described above), it causes 
many disorders. Tridoshic symptoms include coryza, 
cough, frequent vomiting and diarrhea, dry stool, rib 
and shoulder pain, anorexia, panting, head disorders, 
coughing, difficult breathing, fever, hoarseness, and 
colds. These develop emaciation that leads to weight 
loss, wasting of muscles, loss of appetite, and debility. 

3) Excessive weight loss can be caused by great 
grief and worry, envy, terror, jealousy, anxiety, fear 
anger, excessive sexual intercourse, excess oily diet 
when emaciated, fasting, or insufficient sizes of meals 
when weak. 

Should one continue having sexual intercourse 
after the depletion of semen, Vayu then enters the 
blood vessels and is ejaculated. This causes loose, 
dry joints, and further excesses Vayu and weakens 
the body. This deranged Vayu spreads throughout the 
body and further deranges Kapha and Pitta (i.e., 
reduces them). 

Other symptoms include reduction of muscle 
tissue and blood, rib pain, grinding shoulder pain, 
throat irritation, head congestion (owing to excessive 
Vayu vitiating Kapha), malaise, anorexia, and 
indigestion. These symptoms can develop into fever, 
cough, difficult breathing, hoarseness, and excess 
mucus. This can lead to consumption that will develop 
into TB if not corrected. 

4) From poor eating habits, the three doshas can 
become imbalanced and spread throughout the body, 
obstructing the entrances of the circulatory channels. 
This results in most foods becoming converted into 
feces and urine instead of tissue elements. Persons 
become depleted and emaciated. Vayu causes colic, 









Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 17: Respiratory System 


malaise, throat irritations and hoarseness, rib and shoul¬ 
der pain, and excessive mucus. Pitta causes fever, di¬ 
arrhea, and burning. Kapha causes excessive mucus, 
anorexia, coughing, and heaviness of the head. Ex¬ 
cessive coughing injures the lungs, resulting in spit¬ 
ting blood, which further weakens the person. This 
develops into TB. 

Premonitory Signs : Nasal mucus, excessive sneezing, 
salivation, sweet taste in the mouth, poor digestion, 
physical weakness, imagining objects (e.g., dirt, flies, 
grass, hairs) in food and drinks, nausea and vomiting 
(even during meals), loss of appetite or taste, 
weakness or tiredness when eating, fault finding, 
staring at hands, swelling of the feet and face, 
excessive showing of the whites of the eyes, denying 
one’s emaciation, imagining one’s looks are 
disgusting, excessive desire for sexual intercourse, 
wine and meat; miserliness, excessive passion, 
cmelty, covering the head with clothes, nails and hair 
grows at an unusually rapid rate, unusual dreams (e.g., 
being defeated by small animals and insects, climbing 
on piles of hair, bones, and ash; visions of deserted 
villages, empty places, dry wells, stars, and mountains 
falling, trees burning). 

Symptoms: Symptoms of tuberculosis include 
heaviness of the head, coughing, difficult breathing, 
hoarseness, vomiting phlegm, spitting blood, rib pain, 
shoulder pain, fever, diarrhea, loss of appetite and 
taste, coughing up mucus with sticky, thick odorous, 
green, white, or yellowish phlegm. 

Vdghbhata (Ashtanga Hridayam) states that, 
depending where in the body the doshas are found, 
different symptoms will manifest. 



Pulmonary TB 

Location Symptoms 

Upper 

body 

nasal mucus, difficult 
breathing, cough, pain in 
shoulders and head, hoarseness, 
loss of appetite and taste 

Lower 

body 

diarrhea or constipation. 
Digestive tract vomiting 

Sides of 
the body 

rib pain 

Joints 

fever 


The signs and symptoms vary according to the site 
of development of tuberculosis (e.g., pulmonary, 
intestinal, bone, kidney, adrenals, etc.). Main 
symptoms according to modem medicine include 
weight loss (despite proper diet, low-grade fever, and 
pain. 

Secondary diseases include chest pain, excess 
yawning, body aches, expectoration of mucus, weak 
digestion, bad breath, and throat problems. 

Vavu causes pain in the head and ribs, shoulder 
and body aches, hoarseness and other throat prob¬ 
lems. 

Pitta causes burning sensations on the soles, 
shoulders and palms, diarrhea, vomiting blood, bad 
breath, fever, and toxins. 

Kapha produces loss of taste and appetite, 
vomiting, cough, heaviness of head and body, excess 
salivation, mucus, difficult breathing, weak voice, 
poor digestion. When Kapha is predominant, the 
digestive fire is weakened owing to excessive coating 
of the plasma channel (rasa dhatu). This causes the 
channel to become obstructed, preventing plasma 
from going into other tis sues ( dhatus). Blood is forced 
upward and expectorated with mucus. Further, the 
undigested food, which becomes toxic (drna), does 
not allow for proper absorption of nutrients, 
preventing the nourishment of the other tissues. As a 
result, weakness occurs. If one is strong and not 
emaciated, therapy is recommended. Tuberculosis can 
be healed in persons who are still strong or who have 
regained strength. 






















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Therapies: 

Pacificatory Therapies: 

Coryza : Sudation, massage, smoking, pastes, 
sprinkling, whole baths. Ingesting barley, rock salt, 
sour, pungent herbs, and foods mixed with ghee or 
oil. Herbs include pippali, ginger, and amalaki. Foods 
include pomegranates, radish sour, wheat, rice, tea 
of dashmul, coriander, ginger, or bhudmalaki. 

The throat, sides, chest, and head are fomented 
using a bolus (see Chapter 7). The head is sprinkled 
with a lukewarm water decoction of bald and guduchl. 
Nadi sweda (tube steam) can also be applied to these 
areas. Steam water is mixed with Vayu-reducing 
herbs. 

Headaches and pain in the sides and shoulders 

receive poultices of bald, vachd, vidari-kanda, ghee, 
and sesame oil. A paste of kushta, tagara, and 
sandalwood mixed with ghee also relieve these 
symptoms. 

When these symptoms include secondary dosha 
complications, bald, cedar, sandalwood, ndgkeshar, 
punamavd, vidari kanda, shatdvari, sesame oil, and 
ghee are used according to the doshas they reduce 
(as an external ointment). 

Toxic blood may require blood-letting. Abhyahga 
with sandalwood oil or ghee is helpful. Snuff and 
smoke are also useful. Sprinkling milk or sandalwood 
decoction is also advised (see Chapter 7 for various 
therapies). 

If the person is strong, emesis and purgation are 
advised. They are given with ghee or oil to prevent 
drying and debilitation. 

Cough, difficult breathing, hoarseness, head, side. 

and shoulder pain: After stool evacuation, a snuff is 
made with ghee, bald, vidari kanda, and mixed with 
rock salt. Frequent ingesting of ghee, bald, dashmul, 
and milk after meals (and/or bald and ghee during 
the middle of the meal) alleviates these symptoms. 

Fever, difficult breathing, cough, hoarseness: Eat- 
ing ghee mixed with dates, cane sugar, raw honey, 
and pippali heals these conditions. Therapies for other 
symptoms are discussed in their respective chapters. 


Wasting and emaciation: Vavu-reducing herbs and 
foods. Other therapies include abhyahga followed by 
bathing in oil and milk. This removes the blocks in the 
channels ( srotas) and heals the person. After bathing, 
the person receives another abhyahga. 

Ingredients for this abhyahga include shatdvari, 
mahjishthd, punamavd, ashwagandha, apdmdrga, 
bald, vidari kanda, kushthd, rice, linseed, sesame, and 
yeast, barley powder in a mixture of 3 to 1 with the 
preceding ingredients is added, then, honey and 
yogurt. This mixture anointed on the body promotes 
nourishment, complexion, and strength. 

Next, persons dress in special clothes offered in 
worship and place essential oils on themselves. A 
wholesome diet according to their dosha is taken, 
including light whole grains. Meditation music, 
celibacy, pleasant company, company of elders, 
meditation, prayer, ethics, and nonviolence are other 
aspects required to restore good health. 


Cold (Pratishyaya) 

Causes: 

When the head or nasal passages are filled with 
excess Kapha or Pitta they may move towards the 
Vayu location in the head (prati). This causes a serious 
form of cold (coryza) and develops emaciation of the 
body. 

Signs and symptoms are headaches, stuffy nose, 
cough, mucus, nausea, hoarseness, heaviness, fever, 
fatigue, anorexia, and poor mind/body coordination. 
This develops into tuberculosis. 

Therapies: 

Kapha: If mucus is abundant, white, or clear, take 
Kapha- and ama-reducing foods and herbs. Fight, 
















Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 17: Respiratory System 


warm, simple foods. Dairy, sweets, fried foods, herbal 
tonics, and breads (with yeast) must be avoided be¬ 
cause they increase Kapha. If a person is strong, a 
short fast is useful. Tea with lemon juice, fresh gin¬ 
ger, and raw honey reduces Kapha. 

Sweat therapy is advised, using diaphoretic anti¬ 
cough and expectorant herbs prepared as a tea (e.g., 
cinnamon, ginger, pippall, tulsl, licorice, sitopaladi 
mix). Steam tents or sleeping under many blankets 
to promote sweat are also useful. 

Pitta: (Yellow or green mucus, high fever, sore throat, 
flushed face) Gokshura, punarnavd, coriander, fen¬ 


nel, spearmint, and other cooling diaphoretics used for 
Pitta dosha. Sitopaladi or sudarshan mixture is espe¬ 
cially useful for fever. 


Vavu: (Little mucus, dry cough, hoarseness, insom¬ 
nia) For a dry nose, 3 drops of sesame oil can be 
placed in each nostril. Warming diaphoretics used 
for Kapha are mixed with a smaller dose of demul¬ 
cent herbs like ashwagandha, shatdvari, and lico¬ 
rice. Here, too, sitopaladi is an excellent mixture, and 
can be mixed into warm milk . 








The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


The Lungs and Chest Cavity 



Trachea 

Bronchial Tube 

Left Lung 
(Cross Section) 

Ribs 
Pleura 
Chest Cage 
Pleural Space 




















Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 18: Urinary System 


Nothing in this universe is non-medicinal; 
all substances can be used for various healing purposes. 

Ashtanga Hridayam Su. Ch. 9: ver. 10. 


Chapter 18 
Urinary System 

Urinary Diseases, Gravel, Obstructions, Diabetes 


Urinary Diseases 
(Mutra-ghata) 

Jjgx efinition and Causes: Although the bladder is 
) full, urine will not pass. The area involved 
"iNr includes the urinary bladder, ureters (which 
connect the kidneys with the bladder), and urethral 
passage. Urine is secreted into the urinary bladder 
through minute channels. Excessed doshas enter the 
bladder through these channels to produce 20 varia¬ 
tions of urinary diseases. 


Dysuria (Mutra-krichra) 

Difficult or painful urination 

There are 4 types of dysuria: Vayu, Pitta, Kapha, 
and Tridosha. [It’s symptoms can be early signs of 
urinary stones—see below] 

Vayu: Pain in the bladder, groin, and urethral pas¬ 
sage; small quantities of urine are frequently emit¬ 
ted. 

Pitta : Yellow urine is discharged with burning sen¬ 
sation, or blood may be voided. 

Kapha: Heaviness, edema of the bladder, and ure¬ 
thral passage; disrupted flow, slimy urine. 

Tridosha: Symptoms of all three doshas are 
present. 


cooked with dashmul, castor oil, barley, shatavarl, 
punamavd, and rock salt; mixed in equal parts. One 
tsp. of the medicated oil is taken internally. Also, 
dashmul with sesame oil, vinegar, and ghee can be 
used in equal amounts—1 tsp. total 

Pitta: Cooling measures are used to alleviate Pitta. A 
decoction of shatavarl, gokshura, vicldri hand; with 
honey and sugar (equal amounts to make 1 tsp.) Also, 
the seeds of cucumber, licorice, and turmeric; with 
grape juice and rice water can be taken (equal 
amounts—4 gms. or .14 oz. per dose). 

Kapha : Emesis, sudation, an anti-Kapha diet, and 
las si are advised. The powder of small cardamom 
with the juice of dmalaki is also recommended. 
Another remedy includes gokshura, small cardamom, 
and trikatu with honey. Lastly, pravdlpishti with rice 
water is useful. 

Tridosha: The above therapies arc used depending 
upon the predominant dosha. 


Urinary Stones (Mutra-Ashmari) 

Causes: Vayu covers the mouth of the bladder, 
drying up the urine inside. The urine then mixes with 
Pitta, Kapha, or semen, causing stones. Three types 
of this disorder develop: Vayu, Pitta, and Kapha. 


Therapies: 

General : For all urinary retention disorders licorice, 
haritakl, and cedar are taken as powder in milk: or 
water. 

Vayu: Oleation and sudation are applied, especially 
on the lower abdomen. Medicated oil is made of ghee, 


Premonitory Signs: Urinary bladder distention, 
severe pain in and around the stone, urine smells like 
a goat, difficult el im ination of urine, fever, or loss of 
appetite. 


















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Symptoms: 

General: Pain in the navel area, and in the seam 
and head of the bladder; urine flow is interrupted when 
stones obstruct the path/easy flow when there is no 
obstruction, clear, golden-yellow urine, pain if strain¬ 
ing to pass urine, blood in urine if stones cause inter¬ 
nal wounds. 

Vayu: Severe pain causes persons to grind teeth, 
shiver, squeezing penis, mb the navel, cry constantly, 
passing feces with gas, frequent urination, and in 
drops; stones are black, rough, and thorny. 

Pitta: Burning sensation in the bladder, the color 
of the stones are red, yellow, or black. 

Kapha: Pricking pain in the bladder, and feeling 
cold and heavy; stones are big, smooth, golden, or 
white. 


Therapies: 

General: This is considered a serious disease that 
can even lead to death if it is not healed. At the early 
stages, herbal therapy can heal the condition. How¬ 
ever, at later stages, surgery is required. The best herb 
for all urinary disorders is gokshura. 

Vciyu: Gokshura ghee, or gokshura taken alone 
or with las si, also produces good results. 

Pitta: Medicated ghee prepared with a decoction 
of gokshura, kushd, vidari kand, red and white 
punarnavd. Shildjit is also useful. 

Kapha: Medicated ghee made with a decoction of 
gokshura, eld, guggul, black pepper, chitrak, hitig, 
myrrh, and rock salt. Shildjit is also useful. 


Urine Retention (Mutra-ghatadi) 

All the therapies mentioned above are useful for 
urine retention. Purgations, basti, and uttara basti 
(urinary bladder enema) are also suggested if needed. 


ejaculation of the semen, once leaving its origin site. 
By withholding the semen, it becomes dried by Vayu 
inside the scrotum. 

Symptoms: 

Bladder, pelvis, or genital pain; difficult urination, 
scrotum swelling, stiffness or pain; semen begins to 
flow but stops in the middle, coming out only when 
squeezed; urine mixed with semen. 

Therapies: 

Strong enemas, especially urinary bladder 
enemas (uttara basti) are taken to purify the semen 
receptacle. Aphrodisiac herbs are then taken (e.g., 
shatdvarl, ashwagandha). 


Urinary Gravel (Mutra-sharkara) 

Causes: 

Urinary gravel is a collection of small sand-l ik e 
urinary stones caused by Vayu. According to modem 
science, urinary gravel combines to form urinary 
stones. Both systems are saying the same thing in 
different ways. The gravel is expelled with the urine 
when Vayu is moving downward, and it is obstructed 
when Vayu is moving upward. 

Today, modem science breaks the urinary stones 
with lithotripsy (a sonic vibration), turning them into 
gravel. Then, they are expelled through the urinary 
system. 

Therapies: 

Powder of gokshura taken with water and cane 
sugar expels gravel. Tumburu, apdmdrga, and barley 
are good for both stones and gravel. 


Seminal Stones (Shukra-shmari) 

Causes: 

These stones occur in adults due to preventing 















Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 18: Urinary System 


13 Urine Obstruction Disorders 
(Mutraghata) 

Below are discussed various other urinary ob¬ 
structions. In all cases the therapy involves basti and 
urethra basti. 

Vatabasti - 

Obstruction Due to Suppressing the Urine Urge 

Habitual suppression of the urge to urinate ag¬ 
gravates Vayu and Pitta. This causes the urine to dry 
up and block the mouth of the urinary bladder. Thus, 
red or yellow urine is passed with pain, irritation, and 
may distend the bladder. This can also cause burn¬ 
ing, throbbing, twisting, urine expelled in drops, or 
in a continuous flow if the bladder is pressed. There 
are 2 forms of Vatabasti: difficult and very difficult 
(to bear and to heal). These symptoms are similar to 
benign hypertrophy of the prostate (BPH). 

Vata Kundalika - 
Radiating Bladder Pain 

Due to urine retention, Apana Vayu (upward mov¬ 
ing air) becomes excessed. Aggravated Vayu, mov¬ 
ing circularly in the bladder, causes severe, radiating 
bladder pain, circular moving of urine in the bladder, 
obstructed flow, heaviness, urine is released little by 
little, accompanied with expelling feces. One may 
also experience stiffness, heaviness, and cramps. 

Mutra-tlta - 

Obstruction Due to Slow Elimination 

When trying to expel urine after suppressing the 
urge for a long time, it fails to come out or flows with 
mild pain. 

Mutro-tsanga - 

Obstruction Due to Narrow Urethral Duct 

Either urethral blockages or aggravated Vayu can 
cause some urine to remain in the bladder, urethra, or 
urethral passage. Urine thus becomes obstructed, 
flowing slowly (without pain). The remaining urine 
produces heaviness in the urethral passage. 

Mutra-granthi - 

Obstruction Due to Bladder Tumor 

Pain similar to that of a urinary stone is 
experienced from round, immovable, hard, and small 


tumors that may suddenly develop inside the cavity 
of the urinary bladder. Blood affected by Vayu and 
Kapha cause the hard nodular mass at the urinary 
bladder opening. 

Mutra-shukra - 
Obstruction Due to Semen 

Performing sexual intercourse when there is a 
strong urge to urinate causes the displacement of 
semen, and is obstructed. Semen will then be expelled 
just before or after urination. 

Vidghata - 

Obstruction Due to Impacted Feces in Rectum 

(Fistula in between urinary bladder and rectum) 
Persons who are excessively dry, thin, and 
debilitated may experience Vayu moving upwards, 
bringing a small amount of feces into the urinary 
bladder and urethra. This results in urination with the 
odor of feces. 

Ushna-Vata - 

Obstruction Due to Bladder Inflammation or 

Cystitis (Hematuria-blood in the urine) 

Aggravated Pitta, due to excess exercise, hot, 
penetrating foods, long distance walking, and 
excessive sun-bathing, overflows into the bladder 
because of aggravated Vayu. This causes pain, 
burning, or inflammation in the bladder and urethral 
passage (cystitis), and yellow urine. It may be mixed 
with blood, or only blood flowing alone; urine is warm 
or comes out repeatedly with difficulty. 

Mutra-samkshaya - 
Due to Diminished Urine 

Dry, debilitated persons may experience Vayu and 
Pitta depositing into the urinary bladder, diminishing 
urine, causing pain, and burning. 

Mutra-sada - 

Obstruction Due to Bladder Inflammation or 
Cystitis 

If Vayu aggravates Pitta and Kapha (alone or to¬ 
gether), difficult urination is produced. Urine 


' ; 





The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


is yellow, red, white (or all colors mixed), thick, 
accompanied with pain, and is dry. 

Therapies: Kapha- and Pitta-reducing measures 
are used to heal this condition, in addition to the 
common therapies for all these 13 urinary conditions. 

Vatashthlla - Obstruction Due to Enlarged 
Prostate (or prostate tumor) 

When aggravated Vayu becomes trapped between 
the rectum and urinary bladder, it results in an enlarged 
prostate, or a hard, elevated, immovable tumor. It 
causes abdominal distention and blockages of urine, 
feces, and gas. 



The prostate is situated below the bladder and in front of the rectum. The 
urethra tube runs from the bladder to the penis or vulva. 

Healthy Prostate 




An enlarged prostate compresses the lower ureter, obstructing 
the passage of urine. This dilates the bladder and thus weakens 
it. The backed-up urine in the bladder enlarges and weakens 
the upper ureters that run to the kidneys. The kidney pelvis 
becomes damaged. Continued pressure on the kidneys causes 
damage to kidney tissue. 

Therapies for this disorder are covered under 
cancer and tumors, Chapter 22 page 501. 

Mutra Jathara - 

Obstruction Due to Enlarged Bladder 

Habitual suppression of urine causes Vayu to be¬ 
come obstmcted and move upward. A full bladder 
results in abdominal distention below the navel, se¬ 
vere pain, indigestion, and accumulation of feces. 

Therapy: Diuretics (e.g., gokshura ) are used to heal 
this condition (in addition to the common therapies 
for all these 13 urinary conditions). 

Basti Kundala - 

Obstruction Due to Bladder Displacement 

This condition is similar to Vatabasti. 

Vayu: Due to fast travel, jumping, exertion, in¬ 
jury, or pressure on the urinary bladder it may shift 
out of place and remain expanded. This will cause 
pain, shaking, and burning. Urine will pass in drops, 
or if pressed, will come out in a stream. One can ex¬ 
perience stiffening, cramping, and distress. It is a se¬ 
vere condition. 

Pitta: One feels burning, pain, and abnormal 
urine color. 


















Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 18: Urinary System 


Kapha: Persons experience heaviness, swelling 
and oiliness; whitish and precipitant urine. 

Pitta and Kapha forms can only be controlled 
but not healed. 


Obstinate Urinary Diseases (Prameha) 
(Excessive Urination, Diabetes, etc.) 

Causes: There are 24 forms of this disease: 4 are due 
to Vayu, 6 result from Pitta, and 10 are caused by 
Kapha. The main causes of these diseases are fat, 
urine, and Kapha buildups due to; 

1) Foods (e.g., sweets, sours, salts, hard to digest, 
slimy, cold, raw grain; marsh, domesticated, and 
aquatic animal meats). 

2) Liquids (e.g., beer, sugarcane juice, molasses, 
and milk). 

3) Life-styles (e.g., sedentary, sleeping while 
sitting). 

4) Other things causing an increase of Kapha, 
fat and urine. 

Development: 

Kapha prameha: Excessed Kapha overflows into 
the body channels and becomes mixed with the dhatus 
(i.e., tissues of fat (medas), plasma/lymph (rasa), 
muscle (mdnisa), and sweat (Kapha mala). This situ¬ 
ation weakens the dhatus and brings them into the 
urinary system, causing the 10 types of Kapha 
prameha. 

Pitta prameha: Aggravated Pitta and blood also 
can vitiate the urinary bladder when the watery tissues 
are depleted. If fat (medas), muscle (mdnisa), and 
plasma ( rasa) are already weak or depleted, then this 
Pitta excess in the blood produces the 6 types of Pitta 
prameha. 

Vayu prameha: Vayu may also weaken the bladder 
by drawing the depleted tissues into the bladder. Vayu 
diabetes is due to vitiated ojas, marrow, and lymph. 
When Kapha and Pitta doshas become decreased 
Vayu becomes excessed, bringing fat (medas), muscle 
(mdnisa), marrow (Majjd), and life sap (ojas) to the 
urinary system. This produces 4 types of Vayu 
prameha. 

Kapha prameha involves rasa, mdmsa, and medas. 
They are similar in nature. Thus, the herbs to heal 


this prameha will not imbalance the other doshas. 
Pitta prameha involves plasma (rasa), muscle 
(mdmsa), and fat (medas) dhatus that are opposite in 
nature to Pitta-reducing herbs (i.e., Pitta reducing 
herbs are cool). These herbs will increase plasma, 
muscle, and fat tissues. Still, Pitta diabetes ( prameha) 
can be helped with special herbs (e.g., shildjit and 
gudmar) if dhatu depletion is not extensive. 

On the other hand, when Vayu prameha involves 
muscle (mdmsa) and fat (medas) dhatus, it is very 
difficult to treat because all the therapies for reducing 
Vayu will further increase the already excessed fat 
and muscle tissues. In this case, Vayu becomes 
aggravated either due to depletion of the reproductive 
(shukra) and life sap (ojas) tissues (dhatus), or from 
obstruction of the channels due to excess fat (medas) 
and muscle (mdnisa) tissue. 

Premonitory Signs: 

Common to all forms of diabetes is an excess of 
perspiration, body odor, looseness of body parts, 
desiring rest, thickening heart, eyes, tongue, and ears; 
stoutness of body, fast growth of hair and nails, 
wanting cold things, dry throat and palate, always 
having a sweet taste in the mouth, numbness and 
burning of the hands and feet (and other organs), sweet 
urine, matted hair, sticky excreta from orifices, ants 
and insects attracted to the body and urine, 
abnormalities of the urine, urine smells of raw flesh. 

Analysis Cautions 

1) If the urine is yellowish or expelling blood 
without the aforesaid premonitory signs of prameha, 
a person is not to be said to have prameha, but rather 
a disease of Rakta Pitta. Since the signs and symptoms 
of these two diseases are similar, being sure of the 
disease is important. 

2) If persons with prameha expel sweet, slimy, and 
honey-like urine, it is caused by the depletion of 
doshas (a Vayu-caused disease), or from over 
nourishment (a Kapha disease). 

If Vayu, Pitta, or Kapha prameha is left untreated 
after their premonitory signs and symptoms, they are 
not able to be healed. Generally, Pitta prameha is 
controllable. If the adipose tissue (fat /medas) is not 
depleted, then Pitta prameha can be healed. Kapha 


,fe- ^ 









The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


prameha is usually able to be healed. 

Symptoms: 

General: Common to all forms of diabetes is 
the increased quantity and turbidity of the urine. 

Kapha: Excess Kapha weakens the body fluids, 
muscle, and fat; and are drawn into the urinary blad¬ 
der and kidneys. This results in 10 forms of Kapha 
prameha. 

1) Udaka —large quantities of clear urine, white, 
cold, odorless, watery, sometimes slightly murky and 
slimy. 

2) Ikshumeha —urine is sweet, cold, slightly 
salty, and muddy. 

3) Sandra —urine becomes thick when kept 
overnight. 

4) Surd —urine looks lik e beer (clear on top and 
thick on the bottom) when kept overnight. 

5) Pishta —hair stands on end, urine is thick 
and white. 

6) Shukra —urine looks l ik e semen or is mixed 
with semen. 

7) Sikatd —urine has dirty particles, like sand, 
frequently cold, sweet urination. 

8) Shltd —urine contains small hard things 
(because the weakened doshas pass through). 

9) Shanair —urine passes very slowly, with little 
force. 

10) Ldla —urine is thready (like saliva) and 
slimy. 

Pitta: Aggravation of fire is caused by 

a) Excess of hot, sour, salty, alkaline, and 
pungent food. 

b) Eating before the previous meal is digested. 

c) Exposure to sun, fire, physical exertion, 
and anger. 

d) Eating mutually contradictory foods (e.g., 
fish and milk, hot and cold things; see page 551). 

Manifestation of Pitta forms of diabetes is 
quicker than that of those caused by Kapha. The 6 
Pitta forms are only able to be controlled because it 
is a different element (fire) than the watery elements. 
Bitter and pungent herbs heal Kapha. Bitters help 
Pitta, but the pungents will cause aggravation. The 
stomach, small intestine, fat, and the abdominal wall 


membrane (which connects the stomach with the 
other abdominal organs) are involved here. The 6 
forms are; 

1) Kshdra —urine smells, looks tastes and feels 
salty. 

2) Nila —urine is blue. 

3) Kdla —urine is ink black. 

4) Haridra —urine is pungent or bitter, 
yellowish, and bums when expelled. 

5) Mahjishthd —urine smells like raw flesh and 
has a slight red color. 

6) Rakta —urine smells bad, is hot, slightly 
salty and reddish. 

Vayu: These 4 forms of diabetes immediately 
become aggravated due to; 

a) Overeating of astringent, pungent, bitter, 
rough, light, and cold things. 

b) Over indulgence in sexual acts and exercise. 

c) Over use of emesis, purgation, dry enemas, 
head evacuation. 

d) Suppressing natural urges, fasting, physical ac¬ 
cident, excess sun, anxiety, grief, blood-letting, stay¬ 
ing up late at night, poor posture. 

The excessed Vayu then overflows, along with 
muscle fat ( vdsd) and enters the channels ( srotas) with 
urine, causing the development of fat in the urine 
(lipuria). It may also carry marrow to the urinary blad¬ 
der (via the mutravaha srota), deranging the marrow 
(majja) as myelouria. Marrow may be expelled with 
urine as Vayu pushes the marrow out. 

Should there be an excess of lymph entering the 
bladder (due to deficient insulin), large amounts of 
urine are produced, with a need for constant urina¬ 
tion (without pressure). Vayu converts the sweetness 
of life sap (ojas) into an astringent taste and brings it 
to the bladder. This causes roughness, which devel¬ 
ops Diabetes mellitus [Either (a) an insufficient pro¬ 
duction of insulin that causes abnormal metabolism 
of carbohydrates, fats and proteins. Sugar levels are 
increased in the blood and urine causing great thirst, 
frequent urination, wasting, and acidity. 









Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 18: Urinary System 


This can occur in childhood or early adolescence, or 
(b) A mild form appears in adulthood aggravated by 
obesity and an inactive lifestyle. Few symptoms ex¬ 
ist, and insulin may not be needed]. 

The 4 Vayu-caused diseases are serious because 
of the risk of secondary diseases developing due to 
the loss of all the tissues. Vayu-diabetic urine is 
grayish, reddish, and painful. 

1) Vasa —urine is expelled with muscle fat or fat 
may be passed alone and frequently (fat-lipid-like 
urine). 

2) Majjd —urine is frequently expelled with 
marrow, or marrow may be passed alone (mar-row- 
like urine). 

3) Hasti —urine passes continuously and without 
force, mixed with lymph, and without difficulty 
(urinary incontinence/diabetes tuniflues). 

4) Madhu —sweet and astringent urine, which is 
pale and oily (diabetes mellitus). 

This is caused either by aggravated Vayu 
depleting the tissues, or by obstructing the movement 
of the doshas covering it. In the latter case, Vayu 
shows signs of the dosha covering it, washout any 
other reason, occasionally, and thus the bladder is 
sometimes empty, sometimes full. These diseases 
cannot be healed. 

Any form of diabetes not tended to eventually 
develops into Madhu (honey-like) diabetes. All the 
sweet forms of diabetes (i.e., sweet-tasting urine and 
sweet-smelling body) are called Madhu. 

Sweet, slimy urine may be confused as being 
caused by either Kapha (excess nutrition) or Vayu 
(malnutrition). Should Kapha and Pitta forms be 
experienced with all the premonitory signs (and Vayu 
forms, after lasting for a long time) cannot be healed. 
The 4 Vayu types are unable to be healed because 
they afflict the deepest tissue layers (marrow and 
semen). The Pitta forms which last for a long time 
are controllable. Forms where the fat tissue is not 
greatly excessed are healable. 

Secondary Complications: 

Kapha Forms: Poor digestion, anorexia, vomit¬ 
ing, excess sleep, cough, nasal mucus. 

Pitta Forms: Pricking pain in the bladder and 
passage, oozing from the scrotum, fever, burning, and 


loose stools. 

Vayu Forms (upward moving air): Tremors, sharp 
abdominal pain, insomnia, dry mouth and throat, 
cough, difficult breathing. 

Hereditary and genetic diabetes (like all hereditary 
and genetic-caused diseases) cannot be completely 
healed due to the dysfunctional genes. However, these 
forms of diabetes can be controlled; persons can live 
symptom-free as long as they remain on the proper 
herbs and diet. 

The 7 types of diabetic carbuncles (skin or 
subcutaneous tissue bacterial infections that exude 
pus) require surgery. 

Diabetes involves the imbalance of carbohydrate 
metabolism that is controlled by the insulin secretion 
of pancreas. The blood level of sugar/glucose rises 
beyond the normal li mits in the system that is excreted 
by the urinary system. 

General Therapies: 

There are 2 general categories of urinary 
diseases: persons who are strong and obese, and those 
who are weak and emaciated. The former category 
of people use elimination therapies, while the latter 
follows nourishing therapies. After oleation, the strong 
and obese person follows Kapha-reducing therapies 
to eliminate the excesses through the upward and 
downward channels. 

Once the toxins are eliminated (and digestive 
power is strong) one follows refreshing therapy 
(stearopten) [e.g., barley with honey] instead of 
fasting. Fasting immediately after elimination may 
cause cystic tumors; wasting, kidney, urinary bladder, 
and genital disorders. Alleviation therapy is used for 
people not strong enough for elimination therapy. 

Diet: The most important herbs for all doshas are 
shildjit, gudmar, turmeric, neem, amalakl, guggul, and 
arjuna. Turmeric with aloe vera gel (1 to 3 gms./.035 
to .1 oz) is best used during the early stages of diabe¬ 
tes for regulating pancreas and liver functions. Other 
therapies include roasted or fried barley, com flour, 
light, bitter vegetables, barley porridge, ghee, rice, 
and herbs l ik e gokshura, gudmar, triphald, musta, 
cardamom, fenugreek, or coriander, mixed with 

Xk 








The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


honey. Triphala with dmalakl juice can also be used 
to heal prameha. Barley is the main food to heal uri¬ 
nary diseases. Other methods to heal prameha in¬ 
clude strenuous exercises, oil massage, steam, sitz or 
waist bath, and sprinkling of water and ointment. 
Herbs of dry ginger, cardamom, and sandalwood are 
used in baths, and taken orally. Gudmar is the best 
herb for digesting sugar in the pancreas. Gudmar and 
shilajit are an excellent herbal combination used by 
modem Ayurvedic practitioners. 

Simultaneously, the foods and life habits that 
caused the disease are avoided. 

Kapha Therapies: 

1) Emesis and fasting. 

2) Food: Barley soaked in a triphala decoction 
overnight, then mixed with honey and eaten several 
times a day (cane sugar may also be used). 

3) Herbs: Include decoctions of triphala, 
fenugreek, musta, arjuna, sandalwood, lodhra, ajwan, 
gokshura, vidahga, guduchl, haritakl, and chitrak. 
These may be taken with a small amount of ghee. 
Gudmar and shilajit are excellent. 

Pitta Therapies: Only when muscle tissue ( medas 
dhatu) is excessively aggravated is Pitta prameha 
unable to be healed. 

1) Purgation is the best therapy for healing. 

2) Herbal decoctions include sandalwood, 
musta, cimalakl, neem, kutaj, turmeric, blue lotus, 
and arjuna. These are taken with ghee or sesame 
oil. Gudmar and shilajit are excellent. 

Vayu Therapies: 

1) Gudmar and shilajit, triphala, fenugreek, 
musta, turmeric, harltakl, and cimalakl mixed 

with raw honey and cimalakl juice. They may be added 
to a drink of roasted com flour mixed with raw honey. 

2) Medicated oils and ghees. 

Pitta/Kapha Therapies: 

1) For either Pitta or Kapha urinary diseases, herbs 
of gokshura, bibhitaki, and kutaj are mixed in cimalakl 
juice. After digesting this drink rice and soup (with 
ghee) may be taken. 


2) For Vayu secondary excess with Pitta 
prameha, medicated ghee and Pitta-reducing herbs. 

3) For Vayu secondary excess with Kapha 
prameha, medicated oil (canola or mustard) is used 
with the same herbs to reduce Kapha. 

4) For Tridoshic symptoms, both the ghee 
and oils are used with the same herbs. 


Diabetic Ulcer, Pimple, Pustule, etc. 
(Prameha Pidaka) 

Causes: 

If madhumeha (diabetes mellitus) is not treated, 
10 forms of eruptions can develop on the joints, vital 
spots, and muscular areas during diabetes. All three 
doshas are aggravated. 

Symptoms: 

1) Shard-vikd: Raised edges, depressed centers, 
black, oozing, painful, saucer-sized and shaped. 

2) Kacha-pikd: Deep continuous or intermittent 
pain, extending over large areas, smooth, and tortoise 
shell-like. 

3) Jdlini: Stable, vein networks, oily, oozing, with 
a large inner cavity, severe, intermittent pain, minute 
openings. 

4) Vinata: Farge, found on the back or abdomen, 
blue, deep pain, oozing, bending downwards. 

5) Alaji: Burning, raised, hard to bear, spreading, 
reddish-black, severe thirst, boils, delusion, fever. 














Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 18: Urinary System 


6) Masu-rika: Lentil sized and shaped. 

7) Sarsha-pikd: The size and shape of a mustard 
seed, severe pain, surrounded by similar eruptions. 

8) Putrini: A large eruption surrounded by many 
smaller eruptions. 

9) Vidci-rika: Round and hard shaped. 

10) Vidhradi: Abscesses (discussed in the next 
section). 

The first 3 ulcers are caused by fat and are difficult 
to bear and heal. The rest are bearable and easy to 
heal. Aggravated symptoms of these eruptions are 
similar to diabetes. These symptoms may occur even 
without diabetes as they are caused by vitiated fat 
tissue. 

Symptoms of deep yellow or red urine, without 
experiencing any premonitory signs of diabetes, are 
classified under bleeding disorders (Rakta Pitta — 
Chapter 14) and require the same therapies. 

Pidaka Therapies: 

General : Early stages of all 10 eruptions (pidaka) use 
inflammatory edema shotha) therapies (Chapter 25). 
Advanced stages of eruptions use therapies according 
to ulcers (Chapter 16). 

Small eruptions that appear only on the skin, are 
soft to the touch, slightly painful, easily form pus and 


then burst, and develop on persons who are strong 
and can be healed. When symptoms include eruptions 
in the rectum, heart region, head, shoulders, back vital 
parts, and joints; associated with complications; and 
who have poor digestion; no therapy is available. 

Medicated oil herbs for ulcers include cardamom 
( eld), saffron or safflower, sandalwood, and kaishore 
guggul. 

Massage herbs include neem, guduchl, 
bhudmalaki, and patola. 

Sprinkling (parisheka> water requires herbs of 
katukd, neem, vidahga, mahjishthd, gudmar, and 
guggul. 

Liquids and foods include herbs of katukd, black 
pepper, cardamom, vachd, hihg, and vidahga. 

Charak suggests surgical procedures. 

Incontinence 

Useful herbs are cardamom, bakuchi, yogaraj guggul, 
nutmeg, skullcap, cinnamon. 

Renal Failure: 

Punamavd is the recommended herb to use until the 
kidneys begin to function again. 













The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 













Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 19: Ear, Nose, Throat, (Eyes, Mouth) 


Pouring warm water over the body bestows strength, 
but the same over the head, makes for loss of strength of hair and eyes. 

Ashtanga Hridayam - Su. Ch. 2: ver. 1 7 


Chapter 19 

Ears, Nose, Throat, Catarrh, Hoarse Throat, Eyes, Mouth 


Diseases of the Ear Karnagata-Roga- 
Vijnaniya 

wenty-eight different types of ear disorders 
exist: ear (kama) diseases, earache 
(kama-shula), ringing/noise (pranada), deaf¬ 
ness (vadhirya), windpipe sounds (karna-kshveda), 
secretions (karna-srava), itching (karna-kandu), 
karna-guntha, parasites (krimi-karna), prati-ndha, 
two forms of local abscess (vidradhi), boil/pus for¬ 
mation (karna-pdka), pus and malodor (puti-karna), 
four ki nds of cysts, seven forms of tumor, four types 
of swelling (shopha). 

Causes and Symptoms: 

Earache (kama-shula): Great aching pain in the ear 
region and inside the middle ear (tympanum) from 
local Vayu excess that becomes aggravated and 
obstructed by the other imbalanced doshas. 
Ringing/noise (karna-nada): Ringing and other 
sounds resulting from excess local Vayu entering the 
ear the wrong way and becoming blocked in the sound 
channels. 

Deafness (vadhirya): When excess Vayu remains in 
the sound channels along with Kapha imbalances and 
is not healed or balanced. 

Wind-Pipe Sounds (kama-kshveda ): Results from 
cold object or exposure to nasal purgatives for the 
head, or continual derangement of Vayu in the sound 
channel and aggravated by excess work, any wasting 
process in the system, or by ingesting astringent or 
dry items. The sound is caused by excess of Pitta, 
Kapha, and blood. 

Secretion (karna-srava): Caused by excess Vayu in 
the ear cavity, resulting from head injury, remaining 


underwater for a long time, or a spontaneous 
formation and bursting of an inner ear abscess. 

Itching (Kama Kandu): Excess itching from local 
Kapha. 

Excess Ear Wax (Kama Guthaka): Accumulated 
mucus in the ear dries and is hardened by local Pitta 
heat. 

Inner Ear Fistula (kama-prati-ndha): When dried 
ear accumulations caused by secretions become 
liquefied and seep from the nose (and/or the mouth) 
and head, diseases (and certain forms of headaches) 
may develop. 

Parasites (krimi-kama): These vermin, collecting in 
the ear impair the hearing. 

Abscesses (kama-vidrcidhi): These are caused by ear 
ulcer, external injury to the ear, or other unknown 
causes. Symptoms include choking and burning 
sensations, piercing and sucking pain, yellow, red, or 
bloody secretions. 

Pus-Boil- Ulcer Formation (kama-pdka): When pus 
forms in the boils of the ear from excess Pitta, a 
blockage and consequent malodor in the passageway 
of the ear occurs. 

Pus and Malodor (puti-karna): When the pus, with 
or without accumulation of mucus in the ear passage 
is secreted after being heated by excess Pitta, it may 
cause swelling (shopha —Chapter 25), tumors 
(arbuda —Chapter 22) and multiple growths 
(polypoid— arshas —Chapter 15). 

Therapies: 

General: Therapy includes ingesting ghee after meals, 
rejuvenative herbs such as shatdvari and bald, 
refraining from exercise and sex, avoiding wetting 



















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


the ear, and less talking. 

Vayu: For all Vayu-related ear diseases (earache, 
ringing, wind sounds, and deafness), oil is first used 
internally and externally (in the ear too) in addition 
to emulsive purgatives (e.g., Wconcd vidahga). Then 
the ear is fomented with Vayu-reducing herbs by 
means of steam (nadi sveda) that is applied to the ear 
through a tube. Ringing in the ear is helped by placing 
three drops of clove oil in the ear. 

Vdyu/Kapha earache: These arc helped by smoke 
fomentation. Herbs include bilwa, castor oil root, 
ashwaganclhd, barley, and vamsha lochana, boiled 
in fermented rice, It is applied via tube fomentation 
(nadi sveda). Warm oil (mahdndrayan, dashmul, 
sesame, guggul-ghee) is dropped into the ear for 
instant relief (one or two drops). Ingesting ghee after 
meals and shiro basti are also useful. Rice should not 
be eaten at the dinner time meal, but replaced with 
mi lk and ghee. The same herbal oils can also be used 
as nasal therapies, sprinkling and ingested. Three 
drops of garlic oil may be placed in the ear for V/K 
earaches. 

Vdyu earache: Three drops of warm garlic oil are 
applied to the ear. 

Pitta earache: Ghee cooked with licorice, musta, 
mahjishtha, sandalwood and milk, used as ear drops 
(three drops per ear). 

Kapha earache: Three drops of mustard or garlic oil 
are placed in each ear. Strong nasal evacuatives and 
gargling with guggul, pippali and ginger are also 
useful. 

Blood earache: Pitta therapies are followed. Deafness 
(vadhirya): Sesame oil cooked with milk, water, 
bilwa, licorice, mahdndrayan, and dashmul oils is 
applied (3 drops per ear). 

Itching (kama kandu): Local steam (nadi sweda) to 
the ear; herbal emetics, smoke, and head purgatives 
may also be taken. 

Pus/Malodor (puti-kanna), Secretion (kanna- 
srava) and Parasites (krimi-karna): 

General therapies: These include ear-drop therapy 
as discussed above, nasal therapy, smoke, medicated 
washing herbs (see below). 

Secretion (kama-srdva >: Ear drops made from cane 
sugar, licorice, and bilwa (Bilwadi Tail) are made into 
a paste and mixed with goat’s milk and sesame oil. 


Pus/Malodor (puti-karna): Ear drops made from 
milk, honey and herbs of licorice, dmalaki, patta, 
dhataki, mahjishtha, lodhra, and priyahgu. The herbs 
are boiled in mi lk and sesame oil, and are either 
dropped into the ear or ingested. 

Parasites (krimi-kama): This includes vidahga, kutaj, 
musta, guggul taken internally, and mixed with 
warmed mustard oil to be applied to the ear canal. 
Smoke of guggul destroys the odor. Emetics and 
gargling are also useful. 

Wind Pipe Sounds (kama-kshveda): Mustard oil ear 
drops are useful (3 drops per ear). 

Abscess (karna-vidrahi) is the same as ordinary 
abscesses. The ear is fomented after being fi ll ed with 
oil (to soften the deposit). Discharges can then be 
removed with a probe. 

Inner Ear Fistula (karna-pratindha): Therapies 
include oil and sweat, followed by nasal evacuatives. 
Diet and lifestyle changes that reduce the imbalance 
causing this disease are recommended. 

Ear Inflammation - pus - boils (kama-pdka): 
Therapies include lightening (see pahcha karma: 
Chapter 7), vomiting, and bitter herbs (e.g., chirdyatd, 
kutki, neem, aloe vera, gentian, barberry). Bloodletting 
and purgation are also employed. Dirt, parasites, or 
other foreign objects stuck in the ear cavity should 
be removed with a probe. 


Ear Lobes (Karnapal! Rog) 

There are 5 main diseases of the ear lobes. 
Inflammatory Swelling (Paripota): The lobe is sud¬ 
denly pulled and held for a long time in this position, 
it becomes numb, painful, swollen, blackish-red, and 
may spontaneously burst or crack as a result of ex¬ 
cess Vayu. 

Traumatic Swelling (Utpdta): This condition results 
from friction and the weight of earrings. Painful swell¬ 
ing, burning, and pus develops in the ear lobe and 
may be brown or red-colored,owing to toxic blood 
and Pitta. 

























Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 19: Ear, Nose, Throat, (Eyes, Mouth) 


Piercing/Pulling (Unmcintha): Pulling the earlobes 
creates excess Vayu and Kapha at this site, causing 
painful swelling, itching. The color of the lobe 
depends upon which dosha is present in excess. 
Ulceration (Duhka-vardhana): Swollen, painful, 
burning, itching lobes result from being pulled and 
lengthened, leading to pus formation. 

Pustules (Parilehi>: Small oozing pimples, painful, 
burning, and itching may cover the lobes. These result 
from toxic blood, excess Kapha, or parasites. This 
disease quickly spreads. Inflammation and fever may 
develop. The lobe may be destroyed. 

Ear Lobe Therapy 

General: These five diseases are considered very 
dangerous and may eventually destroy the lobe if not 
quickly attended to. The first line of therapy includes 
a wholesome diet of foods, drinks, and lifestyle habits. 
Oils and sweat, ointments, washes, plasters, poultices, 
and blood-letting are used for all five disorders. Vayu 
does best with oils, poultices, and enemas. Pitta does 
best with purgatives. Kapha does best with emetics. 
Inflammatory Swelling (Pari-potaka): Licorice, 
apdmarga, devadaru, bdkuchl, and mahjishthd are 
pasted together and cooked with milk, ghee, sesame 
oil, and are applied to the lobe. 

Traumatic Swelling (Utpdta): Mahjishthd. sesame oil, 
licorice, shatdvarl, musta, turmeric, and mango are 
cooked together and applied to the lobe. 

Piercing or pulling (Unmantha): A medicated oil of 
bdkuchi, guggul, mahjishthd, vidahga, turmeric, 
musta, and ginger is applied to the lobe. 

Ulceration (Duhka-vardhana): Ghee and sesame oil 
are mixed with milk (10 times the weight of the ghee 
and oil) and are cooked with ashwagandha and 
apdmarga. The finished recipe is then filtered before 
application to the ear lobe. Constant application and 
fomentation helps the regrowth of the lobe, making 
it soft, healthy, smooth, painless, evenly developed, 
and able to bear the weight of earrings. 

Pustules (Parilehi): The lobe is oiled with warm ghee, 
sesame or sunflower, cooked with bdkuchl, guggul, 
mahjishthd, vidahga, ginger, and turmeric. A powder 
of these herbs is also dusted on the lobe. The use of 
medicated oil on ear lobes preserves their health. 


Diseases of the Nose Nasa- 
gata-roga-Vijnaniya 

There are 31 forms of nasal (ndsa) diseases: 
obstruction (aplnasa); malodor (puti-ndsd); 
inflammation/pus pimples (ndsd-paka); bloody pus 
in the nose (puya-rakta); hemorrhage (shonita-pitta); 
sneezing (kshavathu); mucus sneezes (bhramshathu); 
vapors (dlpta); stuffiness (ndsd pratindha); cold/ 
mucus/coryza (ndsd-parisrdva); dryness (ndsd- 
shosha); four types of arshas (nasal hemorrhoids); 
four forms of swelling (shopha); seven types of 
tumors; and five forms of prati-shydya. 

Causes. Symptoms, and Therapies 

1. Obstruction—Wasting or Atrophic Rhinitis 
(aplnasa )—excesses of Vayu and Kapha cause 
symptoms of choked and burning nostrils with 
dryness and dirty and slimy mucus in the passage. 
This deadens the faculty of smell and taste. [This is 
identical to the type of mucus (pratishydya) block 
discussed in the next section.] 

Therapies include applying oil and steam to the 
nasal passage, emetics, and purgation, taking light 
and moderate meals, drinking boiled water, and nasal 
inhalation of the smoke from vidahga, pippall, and 
apdmarga. Nasal oil is made from mustard oil and 
herbs of trikatu, hihgwastdk, calamus, kushtha, 
vidahga, and applied daily. 

2. Malodor (puti-ndsd) —Excess Vayu mixed with 
other doshas in the throat and palate roof causes a 
malodorous smell in the nostrils and mouth. The same 
therapies are used as described for obstructions. 

















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


3. Inflammation/Pus/Pimples (ndsd-pdka)—Excess 
Pitta causes sliminess, malodorous ulceration inside 
the nose, secretion, putrefication. Internal and external 
Pitta-reducing therapies are required. Ghee is mixed 
with amalaki, guduchl, durba, eld, and dhdtakl 
flowers. This is applied as a wash and a plaster in the 
nasal passages after bleeding. 

4. Bloody Pus/Ulcers (puya-rakta) —resulting from 
trauma to the head. Pitta and Kapha become very 
heated, causing a discharge of blood or blood-streaked 
pus. For Pitta reduction, a porridge made of milk, 
ghee, durba, mahjishthd, and ndgkeshar is used as a 
poultice. Then the sinus is cut open with a knife and 
a plaster of licorice, durba, ndgkeshar, mahjishthd, 
turmeric, and kutaj is applied. Neem and turmeric are 
used to wash the ulcer daily. Medicated ghee of 
triphald, turmeric, kutaj, durba, ndgkeshar, and bald 
are used to lubricate the sinus. For Kapha reduction, 
poultices of white mustard seeds, durba, ndgkeshar, 
and mahjishthd are used daily until softened. 

The sinus is then cut open with a knife and plastered 
with neem , durba, ndgkeshar, mahjishthd, and sesame 
paste. A decoction of neem, guduchl, and mahjishthd 
is used to wash the ulcer. Sesame oil is cooked with 
myrrh, chitrak, neem, guduchl, and mahjishthd, can 
be applied to the ulcer. Nasal therapy using a few 
drops of herb juice or medicated oil is also useful. 
Another useful therapy is smoke inhalation of 
Shadbindu oil (endrojo, pippall, black pepper, dry 
ginger, calamus (vachd), kut, kutaj, and tulsl seed). 
After the blood and pus are reduced, purifying herbs 
are used. 

5. Hemorrhage (shonita-pitta or nasd puyarakta) 
decoctions and snuffs are discussed under bleeding 
(Raktapitta) in Chapter 14. 

6. Excessive Sneezing (kshavathu )—the nasal marma 
results from dosha imbalance or trauma, causing 
Vayu and Kapha to flow from the nose while 
sneezing. If something touches the nose hairs, a 
trickling sensation develops. This sensation can also 
develop from eating or smelling any pungent aromas 
or from looking at the sun. Therapies include 
evacuative herb nose drops, such as pippall, kayphal, 
dry ginger, kut, vidahga, bilwa, munuka (dry grapes), 


and ginger. Inhaling smoke is also advised. The head 
is fomented with Vayu reducing herbs (e.g., 
ahwagandha, bald), and oily snuff, including 
turmeric, bald, katukd, and bilwa. 

7. Mucus Sneezes (bhramshathu )—Excess thick and 
salty Kapha accumulations in the head become 
liquefied from the heat of Pitta and are expelled 
through sneezing. The same therapies used for 
sneezing may also be used here. 

8. Burning Sensation/Vapor ( dlpta )—Vapor breaths 
of Vayu emit from the nostrils with a great burning 
sensation. Pitta-reducing therapies are used to heal 
dlpta. 

9. Stuffiness/Deviated Septum (ndsd-prat-indha )— 
Upward moving Vayu (Udan) becomes excessive as 
a result of Kapha and blocks the nasal passages. 
Therapies include applying blowing powders of 
vidahga, millet seed, vachd, kut, kayphal, 
frankincense, sage, and tulsl to the nose. Talisadi 
churna with honey or shrihgyadi churna may be taken 
internally. Vayu-reducing herbs such as 
ashwagandha, bilwa bark, gokshura, kantkdri, 
punarnavd will provide relief. Bald or Ndrdyan oil 
is also useful. 

10. Cold and Mucus/Coryza (ndsd-paris-rdva )— 
Constant clear or white watery secretion of Kapha 
will emit from the nostrils (especially at night). 
Therapies include powdered herbs of musta, kutki, 
pippall, turmeric, chitrak, rock salt, and kayphal 
inhaled through the nose. Fresh herb juice poured in 
the nose is also useful. Inhaling aromas of chitrak 
and cedar may also be taken. 

11. Dryness (ndsd-parishosha) —Excess Vayu and 
Pitta causes difficult breathing owing to drying, 








Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 19: Ear, Nose, Throat, (Eyes, Mouth) 


hardening, and accumulation of the mucus (Kapha). 
Therapies include ghee and sesame oil used as a na¬ 
sal lubricant. 

* Excess Mucus (Ndsd-srava) —Vayu and Kapha 
block the passages of respiration (similar to 
pratinaha). Consequently, a continuous discharge of 
yellow or white fluid runs from the nose. Vayu/Kapha 
therapies are used. 

* Dry Frontal Sinus ( Srotah shringata-shosha) —Nose 
oil drops of anu taila [sesame oil, goat’s milk, 
madhuka, dashmul decoction and rock salt] may be 
used. 

The four nasal hemorrhoids or polyps (arshas — 
Chapter 15) [G uggul, triphald and pippall are used.] 
and four swellings (shophcis —Chapter 25) result from 
the three deranged doshas, either separately or in 
combination. Therapies are the same as those 
discussed in their respective chapters. 

Seven different nasal tumors (arbuda) exist, 
(Vayu, Pitta, Kapha, Vayu/Pitta, Vayu/Kapha, Pitta/ 
Kapha, Tridosha). 

General Therapies: Triphald, antiseptic and 
germicidal herbs are taken internally, as snuff and oil 
drops. 

Vayu: Comfrey, ginger, licorice, sandalwood, tur¬ 
meric, asafoetida, bhrihgardj, brdhmi. 

Pitta: Barberry, dandelion, sandalwood, turmeric, 
jasmine, mahjishthd, neem, bhrihgardj, brdhmi. 

Kapha: Barberry, dandelion, sandalwood, turmeric, 
jasmine, mahjishthd, neem, asafoetida, bhrihgardj, 
brdhmi. 

R hi nitis (Plnasa) 

It is caused by all doshas. Two stages of rhinitis 
can occur: early and advanced. 

General Symptoms: Intense pain and distress 
occurring in all three doshas. 

Early Symptoms: Heaviness of the head, no ap pe¬ 
tite, discharge of thin fluid from the nose, feeble voice, 
and frequent expectoration of mucus and saliva. 

Advanced Symptoms (Pakva): Mucus becomes 


thicker, staying in the nasal passages; voice returns, 
mucus returns to its normal color. If this condition is 
neglected, it can develop deafness, blindness, loss of 
smell, eye diseases, body swellings, poor digestion, 
and cough. 

Plnasa Therapies: 

(also see next section—Hoarse Voice) 

When symptoms of one dosha dominates, the fol¬ 
lowing therapies are used. 

Vayu: Unction followed by non-unctuous enema. 
A light, Vayu-reducing diet using, oily, sour, and hot 
foods. Hot water is also used for drinking and bathing. 
Homes should be draft-free. Anxiety, exertion, 
excessive talking, and sexual intercourse should be 
avoided. 

Pitta: Ghee should be taken with bitter herbs and 
mi lk boiled with ginger to help dispel the toxins. This 
is followed by nasal evacuatives, such as vidahga, 
apdmdrga, and pippall (with turmeric). Pitta-reducing 
foods and liquids can also be taken. 

Kapha: Lightening therapy (emesis) is used with 
symptoms of heaviness or anorexia. To improve 
digestion, ghee is applied to the head, followed by 
fomentation and water sprinkling (parisheka). 

Sesame seed paste is eaten, followed by emetic 
and pungent herbs (e.g., garlic, kushtha, vachd, 
pippall), with green gram powder, rock salt, and ghee 
boiled in milk . This drink causes emesis. The herbs 
can also be made into a medicated mustard oil and 
applied to the nasal passages. Kapha-reducing foods 
and liquids are taken. 

For all nose and head disorders, shadbindu, 

bilwa and Ndrdyan oils are useful. 


















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Catarrh 

Inflamed Mucus Membranes 
of the Nose and Throat 
(Pratishyaya-Pratishedha) 

Causes: 

Overindulgence in sexual intercourse, heating of 
the head, inhaling dust or smoke through the nose, 
excessive heat or cold, suppression of stool and urine, 
eating raw foods, or excessive talking can instantly 
cause nasal catarrh. Excesses of Vayu, Pitta, Kapha, 
Tridosha or blood may cause catarrh (pratishyaya). 

Premonitory Signs : 

Heavy head, sneezing, aching limbs, goose 
bumps. 

Symptoms: 

Vdyu: Hoarseness, stuffiness, thin mucus secretions, 
dry throat, palate and lips, pricking and piercing pain 
in the temples, excessive sneezing, bad taste in the 
mouth. 

Pitta : Hot, yellow, hot smoky mucus secretions, 
heated skin, thirst, emaciation, yellow s ki n. 

Kapha: Constant mnny nose, cold, white or clear 
mucus, swollen eyes, heavy head, tickling and itching 
in the head, throat, lips and palate. 

Tridosha: Spontaneous appearance or disappearance 
of symptoms of all three doshas. 

Blood: Bloody secretions from the nose, red eyes, 
bruised pain in chest, bad breath and smell, loss of 
smell, small white or black worms in the nose. 

Chronic Coryza (dushtha pratishyaya): Neglect of 
coryza and poor eating habits, causes this condition 
to worsen. Serious conditions are noted by constant 
alternation between dry and slimy nostrils, and 
between contracted and expanded nostrils, foul smell 
and loss of smell. Nasal diseases previously discussed 
can also develop. Other symptoms include ear, eye, 
head disorders, graying or baldness, whitening of 
body hairs, thirst, difficult breathing, cough, fever, 
intestinal bleeding, swellings (shopha), hoarse voice, 
and consumption. Chronic coryza symptoms are 
difficult to heal. Inhaling smoke of roasted gram flour 
and ghee is advised. 


Therapies: 

General: Ghee emetics and fomentation are useful 
except during the beginning and acute stages of 
catarrh. Fresh herb juice (according to dosha) is 
applied as nasal drops (for blood conditions such as 
bloody secretions from the nose) add sugar cane and 
milk). Acidic foods should be lukewarm and taken 
with ginger, fresh or dried. Sugar cane juice and 
pungent tastes may help thicken mucus secretions. 

When mucus is too thick, it can be loosened and 
secreted by using nasal head purgatives, non oily 
enemas, inhaling warm aroma smoke, and medicinal 
gargles. 

Persons should rest in draftless rooms, with their 
heads covered to protect them from the temperature. 
White basmati rice, haritaki and other herbs related 
to the excessed dosha are eaten. Wine, cold liquids 
and baths, sexual intercourse, anxiety, grief, 
suppression of stool and urine, and eating very dry 
foods should be avoided. 

Fasting (if one is strong) or light meals with 
digestive and appetite-increasing herbs are used when 
catarrh is accompanied by vomiting, aching, heavy 
limbs, fever, lack of hunger, apathy, and diarrhea. 
Adults with a Vayu/Kapha-caused illness should 
drink a large quantity of liquids and them vomit. 
Vdyu: Ghee cooked with vidari-kand, bald, vdsdk, 
licorice, triphald, trikatu, chitrak, and rock salt. Snuff 
of warm and moist herbs and oils may also be used. 
Pitta and Blood: Ghee cooked with bitter herbs is 
ingested. Decoctions of bitter herbs are used to wash 
and plaster the affected area. Red sandalwood, 
guduchl, licorice, shatdvarl, triphald, honey, and cane 
sugar are boiled in milk and/or oil and used as a gargle 
and nasal purgative. 

Kapha: Ghee is applied to the affected area. Persons 
should eat barley gruel and sesame seeds or paste, 
followed by vomiting. Then Kapha-reducing 
measures are used. Oil cooked with bald, 




















Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 19: Ear, Nose, Throat, (Eyes, Mouth) 


vidahga, pippall, tulsl, kut, vdsdk, eld and black pep¬ 
per are used as nasal drops. Herbs of chamomile, 
ashwagandha, vdsdk, vidanga and haritakl are 
smoked. 

Tridosha: Ghee cooked with bitter and pungent herbs 
is ingested; herbal smoke (dhuma), as for Kapha 
catarrh (e.g., viclahga, vdsdk) is used; pungent foods 
are eaten. Nasal therapy and gargling use sesame oil 
cooked with musta, brdhml, cardamom, pippali, 
vachd, katukd, pippali, myrrh. Vayu-reducing herbs 
are cooked in mi lk and water (twice as much water 
as milk) and cooked to half the amount. Then ghee, 
cane sugar, licorice, and red sandalwood are added. 
This mixture is also used as a nasal therapy—4,6, or 
8 drops are put into each nostril. 

Chronic Coryza (Dus hi ha Pratishydya): The smoke 
of roasted gram flour and ghee is inhaled. When the 
nose is dry, an oil snuff is made from sesame oil, 
goat’s milk (made into paste), dashmul decoction and 
10 times as much licorice and rock salt. Anu taila is 
another good oil for the this condition. Therapies to 
reduce all doshas are required. 


Hoarse Voice (Svara-bedha) 

Cause Hoarseness may result from Vayu, Pitta, 
Kapha, Tridosha, TB, or excess weight. 

Symptoms: 

Vayu: The throat is dry, harsh, unsteady and thorny. 
Relief comes from oily and warm foods and liquids. 

Pitta: Burning sensation and dryness of the palate 
and throat, inability to speak. 

Kapha: The throat feels coated, voice is slow, 
husky, and obstructed. 

Tridosha: All three dosha symptoms are 
experienced. 

TB : Painful upon speaking; hot fumes emit from 
the mouth. There is no therapy for this type of hoarse¬ 
ness. 

Over Weight: Kapha symptoms, some difficulty 
speaking. There is no therapy for this type of hoarse¬ 



Therapies: 

All forms of TB are caused by simultaneous de¬ 
rangement of all three doshas. Depending upon one’s 
strength, the predominant dosha aggravating the con¬ 
dition, and the stage of development, the appropriate 
therapies are applied. There a two general therapeu¬ 
tic categories: the specific and general. Specific dis¬ 
orders include colds, headache, and difficulty breath¬ 
ing. All seven of the weakened tissue elements must 
be balanced to promote general healing. 

Alleviation Therapies These therapies include ghee, 
sesame oil, lemon and lime, pippali, vdsdk, durba, 
ndgkeshar, black salt, and dmalaki eaten hot, with 
foods such as thick or thin gruel (barley, rice, or wheat, 
depending upon dosha and strength). External thera¬ 
pies include fomentation, massage, aromatherapy, 
sprinkling, bath,) and blood-letting. 

Colds/Rhinitis (Pinasa) are healed with chitrak, 
haritaki, and triphald. 

Fomentation: Applied over the throat, chest (and 
the sides of the chest), and head, using thick gruel or 
pudding made with boiled milk, barley, dashmul, oil, 
and ghee. For headache or pain in the chest, sides, or 
shoulders, a thick hot ointment is applied using cala¬ 
mus, guggul, punarnavd, shatdvari, sandalwood, 
vidari kand, bald, vdsdk, cardamom, ghee, and oil. 
For these conditions, aromatherapy, sneha —sandal¬ 
wood oil massage, and medicated enemas are useful 
after meals. 

Water Sprinkling (Ekdnga dhara or Parisheka 

sveda): Water boiled with bald, guduchi, 
ahwagandha, shatdvari, sandalwood, barley, and 
honey are poured over the head when the mixture 
becomes lukewarm. 

Elimination Therapies: First, oleation and fomenta¬ 
tion therapies are undergone, then mild emetics and 
purgation. As with all therapies, physical strength and 
health must be considered. Therapies should neither 
deplete nor causing diarrhea. 




ness. 




















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Persons who have extensive depletion of the dhatus 
must not undergo elimination therapy. Solely the heat- 
producing properties of the feces (purisha mala) sus¬ 
tains life. All the digestive fires of the dhatus are 
weakened; only the main digestive fire is active. 

General: Ghee boiled with bald, dashmul, 
turmeric, milk, sitopaladi, and eating after meals. 
These therapies are useful for cough, throat disorders, 
difficult breathing, and pain in the shoulders and sides 
of the chest, and headache. 

Cough: Nasal oils and aromatherapy herbs 
include bald, vidari kand, vasdk, ashwaganclhd, and 
chyavan prash. 

Throat: Aromatherapy with ghee, pippall, bald, 
kaychant, licorice, small cardamom seeds, and mi lk . 

Burning, fever, upper body bleeding: Vasdk, 
shatdvari, durba, ndgkeshar, and ghee, grapes. Care 
should be taken to follow therapies for the appropriate 
stage of fever ( see Chapter 14 for fevers). 

Excess Phlegm: If persons are not too weak, and 
predominantly of Kapha constitution, therapies may 
include boiled milk with pippall, apdmdrga, 
cardamom, tulsl, and vasdk. Another useful therapy 
is thick barley gruel boiled with emetic herbs and 
ghee. 

Vdyu causes excessive phlegm, so oily and hot 
therapies are necessary. 

Vomiting: When phlegm results from excess Vayu 
and Kapha, Vayu-reducing foods and herbs (e.g., 
black pepper, ajwan, ginger, honey), and arjuna for 
the heart are taken. 

Diarrhea: People with TB have weak digestive 
fire, causing diarrhea, mucus, bad taste in the mouth, 
and loss of appetite. Therapies include thick barley 
gmel with bilwa, kutaj, ginger, ishabgol, or dmalaki, 
arjuna, gokshura, ghee, and mung flour, mixed as a 
drink. 

Bad Taste in Mouth: Brush teeth morning and 
evening. Chew herbs of cardamom, turmeric, musta, 
dmalaki, pippall, and coriander to remove bad tastes. 
They may be mixed with sesame oil, ghee, honey 
milk, and sugar cane, and kept in the 

mouth as a thin paste. Herbs include cardamom, 
khadir, and majuphal. 

Miscellaneous Therapies: Oil massage, wearing 
new clothes, taking medicated baths, medicated 


enema, using pleasant aromas, soothing music, good 
company, meditation, prayer, donating, celibacy, 
truthfulness, having good conduct, and nonviolent 
activities, words, and thoughts. Other therapies 
include drinking goat’s milk and staying in a pine 
forest. A parallel in Western medicine was the use of 
sanitariums for healing and recuperation. 




















Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 19: Ear, Nose, Throat, (Eyes, Mouth) 


Eye Diseases 

(Aupadravikam Adhyayam) 

Eyeball (Navana-Budbuda): 

The eyeball consists of all five elements. Earth 
(bhu) forms the muscles. Fire ( tejas) forms the blood 
in the veins and arteries. Air (Vciyu) forms the iris 
and the pupil. Water (jala) forms the cornea. Ether 
(akdsha) forms the ducts or sacs that discharge se¬ 
cretions. 


Rasa and alochak Pitta support the anterior coat 
(retina). Muscle (mdmsa) supports the chorid or 
second coat. Fat tissue (medas) supports the third 
or scleroid coat and cornea. There are many divi¬ 
sions and subdivisions of these coats. 

Blood vessels, muscles, vitreous body and the chor¬ 
oid hold together the various parts of the eyeball. The 
eyeball itself is held by a watery substance, the cap¬ 
sule of tenon, which is supported by various vessels. 
When excessed doshas pass upward into the eyes 
through the veins and nerves, many diseases are 
caused. 


Cornea 

Anterior 

Chamber 


Posterior 

Chamber 

Conjunctiva^ 

Laterals 

Rectus 

Muscle 


Left Eye 



Macula_ 
Nerve Sheath 


Pupil 
Iris 

Zonules 
Ciliary 
Body 


Medial Rectus 
Muscle 

Retina 

Chorid coat (layer) 
Sclerotic Layer (coat) 

Optic Nerve 
Canal for central artery 


Lachrymal 

Glands 



’uncta lachrymalia 


Lacrimal 

Sac 


Nasal Duct 





















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Lachrymal 



Premonitory Signs: Cloudy vision, slight 
inflammation, tear secretion, accumulated mucus, 
heaviness, burning, aching, and red eyes. 

Eyelid inflammation causes feelings of bristles 
studded in the eyes, pricking pain, and impaired sight 
(seeing colors with the eyes opened or closed). 

Causes: Local doshas become imbalanced from 
submerging the head in water immediately after 
exposure to heat and constant glaring at the sun, 
straining to see objects far away, taking naps, staying 
up late, forced staring, excessive crying, grief, worry, 
fatigue, being hit or bumped, excessive sex, overeating 
or drinking, suppressing the natural urges, smoke, 
dust or sweat entering the eyes, excessive or blocked 
vomiting (i.e., pressure), and constant squinting to 
see tiny objects. 

There are 76 forms of eye disease: 10 Vayu, 12 
Pitta and 13 Kapha, 16 forms related to excesses or 
toxic blood, 25 from tridoshic causes, and 2 resulting 
from external trauma. 

Development and Symptoms: 

Vdyu: Five Vayu disorders are healable, anyato- 
Vayu, ophthalmia (adhi-mantha), shushkdkshi-pdka, 
abhishyanda, and maruta-paryaya. Vayu cataracts 
can only be temporarily healed. The other four 
diseases cannot be healed. Three of these disorders 


affect vision (hata-dhimantha, nimisha, gam-bhirika), 
and one afflicts the sclerotic coat (Vdyu-hatavartma). 

Pitta : Seven Pitta eye diseases can be healed 
(abhishynda, ophthalmia Jadhi-mantha, am-ladhy- 
ushita, suktikd, Pitta-vidagdha-drishti, pothaki, also 
known as gramulocyte tracoma, and lagana). Three 
can only be prevented from getting worse (kacha, 
parimldyi, nila). Two disorders cannot be healed 
(hrasva-jadya, jala-srdva). 

Kapha: Eleven disorders can be healed 
(conjunctivitis (abhishyanda), cataracts (adhi-man¬ 
tha ), baldsa-granthita, shleshma-vidagdha-drishti, 
pothaki, lagana, krimi-granthi, parik-linna-vartma, 
shukldrma, pishtaka, shleshmo-pandha (healed by 
excision). Only Kapha cataracts (Kapha Kacha) are 
containable. Srdva-roga is incurable. 

Blood: Twelve forms are healable ( cataract/adhi- 
mantha, abishyanda, klishta-vartma, siraharsha and 
siropdta, anjana, sirajdla, parvani, non-ulcerated 
avrana, shukraroga (corneal calcification), 
shonitdrma, arjuna). Kacha cataracts are only 
pacifiable. Five are incurable ( raktasrdva, ajakdjata, 
pendent Javalambita, shoni-tarshas, shukraroga [If the 
third sclerotic layer is affected then it is incurable]. 
When the first and second sclerotic layer are affected, 
they are difficult to heal. 























Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 19: Ear, Nose, Throat, (Eyes, Mouth) 


Tridosha: Eighteen diseases cannot be healed 
(vartmavabandha, siraja-pidaka, prastdryarma, 
adhi-mdnsdrma, snayvarma, utsangini, puyd-lasa, 
arvuda, shydva-vartma, kardama-vartma, 
arshovartma, shukrashas, sharkara-vartma, two in¬ 
flammations without local swelling/ sashopha-pdka 
and ashopha-pdka, bahala-vartma, kum-bhikd, and 
visa-vartma). Two disorders are controllable ( kdcha- 
cataract [palliative] and paksh-makopa). Four diseases 
cannot be healed (puya-srdva, nakulandhya, 
akshipdkd- tyaya, alaji). 

External: Both forms are incurable; saniinilla/cx- 
temal blow, and animitta /seeing the sudden light of a 
celestial being. 

Locations: Of the 26 diseases, 9 affect the joints, 21 
the eyelids, 11 the vitreous humor, 4 the choroid, 17 
the entire eyeball region, and 12 the pupil or crystal¬ 
line lens. The two external diseases affect the entire 
eyeball. 

General Therapies: All types of eye disease dis¬ 
cussed in this chapter can be helped with any of the 
following; 

1. Triphald, sarsaparilla and turmeric 

2. Barberry and raw honey, or just raw honey 3. 
Punarnavd decoction with rose water 4. 

Chandrodaya varti 

5. Triphald ghee 

6. Pravdl pishti 

7. Saptamrita loha (iron ash) 

Joint and Binding Membrane 

(Sandhigata- Roga -Vijnaniya) 

Development. Symptoms. Therapies: There are 9 
related diseases. These include symptoms of Vayu, 
Pitta and Kapha diseases, and are the premonitory 
symptoms of eye diseases. 

1. Puydlasa: A pus-filled swelling that develops at 
any joint and is malodorous and dense (some say it is 
painful and without pus). It is treated with blood¬ 
letting. After oil and fomentation around the affected 
area, blood-letting is performed, followed by a 
poultice of myrrh. 

2. Upangha: A large painless cyst at the union of the 

,4? V 


pupil and choroid (Krishna-mandala) [see diagram 
2], with itching and a little pus. This is caused by 
Kapha. The affected area is opened and mbbed with 
pippall and honey. Then the surrounding area is 
scraped. Before pus forms, oil and light fomentation 
therapy is used. 

3-6. Srdva: Deranged Pitta, Kapha or blood, passing 
through the lachrymal ducts into the binding tissues 
of the four joints produces a painless secretion with 
symptoms of the excessed dosha. Four forms exist: 

a) Puya-srdva —A pus-filled swelling at any eye 
joint where the pus is secreted. This results from 
Kapha, Pitta, and blood. Rock salt and honey heal 
this disease. 

b) Shleshmd-srdva —A thick, slimy, white secre¬ 
tion of mucus and pus, without pain. Rock salt and 
honey heal this disorder. 

c) Raktd-srdva —A copious, thin, warm and blood- 
streaked secretion. It results from toxic blood at that 
location. Rock salt and honey heal this condition. 

d) Pitta-srdva —A warm, watery, yellow-blue (or 
reddish yellow) secretion from the middle part of the 
joint results from excess Pitta. Rock salt and honey 
heal this malady. 

7) Parvani: A small, round coppery swelling at the 
joint of the choroid (Krishna-mandala) and sclerotic 
coat (shukla-mandala) due to deranged local blood, 
with burning and aching. Rock salt and honey heals 
this disorder. 

8) Alaki: A similar swelling that occurs at the same 
place, but it is larger. Rock salt and honey or rose 
water are used to heal this ailment. 

9) Krimi-granthi: A cyst or swelling with itching, 
appearing where the eyelids and lashes meet, resulting 
from parasitical germination. The parasites infect the 
inner lining of the eyelid where it is connected with 
the sclerotic coat, invading and weakening the eyeball. 
After fomentation and incision, a decoction of 
triphald and myrrh is used on the affected area. 



















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Eyelids (Vartmagata-Roga-Vijnaniya) 

Development. Symptoms. Therapies: The doshas, 
either alone or in combination, expand through the 
nerves and veins of the eyelids (vartma), causing 
excess blood and fleshy growth. This causes excess 
fleshy growth that is responsible for 21 diseases of 
the eyelids. 

1. Utscingini (conjunctival cyst): A rolled or indented 
boil or pimple appears on the outer lower eyelid, with 
its head pointed inward. Therapy includes 
amritahwardivarti (guduchi, lotus stem, bilwa, patola, 
licorice, prapaundarika, cedar, and sarsaparilla. A 
quantity of 320 gms of these herbs is made into a 
decoction, then strained and reheated until thick. Then 
10 gms of white pepper and 40 gms fresh jasmine 
flowers are added until the decoction becomes sticky. 
Then one drop is placed in the eye. It can also be 
treated with scarification. 

2. Kumbhika (internal stye-hordeolum cyst): 

Resulting from all three doshas, many boils or 
pimples develop on the joint of the eyelids and lashes, 
burst and then become inflamed. This is healed with 
chitranjan (1.25 gms black pepper, 5 gms 
samudraphena (cuttle-fish bone) and 1.25 gms lead 
sulfide are pounded finely during Citra constellation 
(a Vedic astrology Uyotish mystical star) It can also 
be treated by scarification. A general treatment 
includes placing one drop of honey in the eye. 

3. Pothaki (trachoma/granular conjunctivitis): Many 
red, hard boils or pimples (such as red mustard seeds), 
that are painful, itchy, and secreting. Honey or 
barberry is used to heal this condition. It can also be 
treated by scarification. 

4. Vartma-sharkard (infection of meibomian gland/ 

trachoma): Rough large pimples surrounded by very 
small and thick pustules (that cover the entire length 
of the eyelid). Chandro-daya varti is used to heal this 
disorder. Scarification may also be used. 

5. Arsho-vartma (papillary trachoma): Small, soft, 
rough pimples on the eyelid, with little pain. 
Chandrodaya varti (shank bhasma (conch shell ash), 
bibhltakl, hantakl, lead sulfate, black pepper, all 
mixed in equal quantities). Then goat’s milk is mixed 
with the chandrodaya varti until it becomes a paste. 
The paste is then rolled into a cylindrical form with a 
diameter of about 1/12 of an inch. This rod is dipped 
in water briefly, then applied to the eye. It can also be 


treated by scarification. 

6. Shushkdrshas (chronic papillary trachoma or a form 

of tumors): Long, rough, hard numb pimples on the 
eyelid. Rasdhjana (Berberis aristata DC extract) is 
used to heal this malady. Scarification can also be 
used. 

7. Aniana (external stve-hordeolum cyst): Small soft, 
coppery pimples on the eyelid, with burning, pricking, 
and slight pain. It is treated by excision. After 
fomentation, a spontaneous bursting may occur. This 
requires pressing and rubbing with a plaster of 
jasmine, cardamom, and myrrh mixed with honey. 

8. Bahala-vartma (multiple chalazion): Equal-sized 
pimples that are hard, along the eyelid, and of similar 
shape and color. Nllathotha (crude copper sulfate), 
lead sulfite, small eld and pawchi with honey. It can 
also be treated by scarification. 

9. Vartma-bandha: Eyelid edema with itching and 
slight pain, preventing opening of the fids. Nllathotha 
(crude copper sulfate or copper acetate, or basic 
copper acetate), lead sulfite, small eld, and pawchi 
with honey. 

10. Klishta-vartma (angio-neurotic edema): Mild, 
coppery inflamed swellings of both eyelids 
(simultaneously), with slight pain, suddenly 
becoming red or discharging blood. Punarnavd, 
triphald, and rock salt mixed with honey are 
recommended. Scarification may also be used. 

11. Kardama-vartma (non-ulcerative blepharitis) : 

When the previous disorder (klishta) is affected by 
Pitta. Inflammation of the lid margin with redness 
develops. Further, the area can become thick, forming 
scales and crust, shallow marginal ulcers or discharge 
dirty blood and mucus. Honey or barberry heals this 
condition. Alternatively, it is treated by scarification. 

12. Shydva-vartma (ulcerative blepharitis): A dark 
brown coloration of the eyelids, both internally and 
externally, with swelling, pus secretion, and itching. 
Therapy includes red sphaiikiAum), eld, and barberry 
with rose water. It can also be treated by scarification. 

























Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 19: Ear, Nose, Throat, (Eyes, Mouth) 


13. Praklinna-vartma: The outer eyelid swells 
(edema) with mucus deposits in the inner surface, 
with little pain, secretion, itching, and pricking. 
Surgery is contraindicated. Oil, fomentation, 
venesection, purgation, nasal evacuatives and non oil 
enemas are required to cleanse the system. Then eye 
washes, salves, drops, snuffs, and aromatherapy are 
used. Herbs include musta, turmeric, licorice, 
punamava, triphala, vamsha lochana, with honey. 
Myrrh and white pepper applied as a slave alleviates 
itching of the eye. 

Itching: One application of an eye salve of black salt, 
white pepper, red sandalwood, sugar cane root, 
barberry, cedar, white salt, and chameli leaf in equal 
parts. 

Swelling (shopha): Musta, cedar, triphala, 
punamava, lodhra, are pasted together as an eye salve. 

14. Aklinna-vartma (ankvlo belpharon): The eyelids 
stick together without any pus or secretion (even if 
the eyes are constantly washed with water. Surgery 
is contraindicated. 

15. Vdtdhata-vartma (lagophthalmos): Drooping or 
inactivity of the eyelids, with or without pain, 
obstructing the opening of the eye lashes. The lids 
seem to be out of joint. It is treated by scarification. 
Pitta causes this disorder. Therapies include triphala 
pasted with water and applied on the eyelids, or 
pippali and olive oil paste on the eyelids. 

16. Atyuda (eyelid tumor or angiomas): An uneven, 
red, knotty swelling or shape which quickly grows 
on the inside of the eyelid, with little pain. Herbal 
therapies include pippali and olive oil paste on the 
eyelids. Triphala pasted with water can also be used. 
It is also treated by incision. 

17. Nimesha (ptosis): Wrinkling of the eyelids due to 
excess Vayu in the nerves or veins. 

18. Shonitdrshas (internal hemorrhage): Soft, fleshy 
growths on the eyelids, which reappear even after 
they are surgically removed. Pain and burning are 
also present, resulting from excess blood. Useful herbs 
include triphala, guduchi, amalaki, turmeric, and 
licorice. 

19. Lagana orNagana (chalazion cyst): A thick, hard, 
slimy, painless nodular swelling on the eyelid, with 
itching and no pus or secretion. It is treated by 


excision. 

After incision, vamsha lochana or pippali are 
mixed with honey and applied to the incised area. 
Haritaki, ginger, black pepper, neem, vdsdk, and 
lodhra mixed together are also useful. Larger incisions 
require cauterization with alkali or fire. This is caused 
by Kapha. 

20. Visa-vartma: An inflamed swelling of the 
eyelid, dotted with tiny punctures or pores. It is treated 
by excision. Useful herbs include red sandalwood, 
rose water, guduchi, punamava, and mamird. It is 
caused by an excess of Kapha. 

21. Pakshma-kopa (Eye Lashes —trichiasis dis- 

trichisis and entropion): Excessed doshas accumulate 
around the eye lash, causing them to become rough 
and sharp pointed. This develops eye pain, which is 
relieved when the lash is pulled off. The eye is 
sensitive to wind, heat, or the light of a fire. Therapy 
can be palliative or provide temporary relief, if persons 
still have their sight. This disease cannot be healed, 
but it can be controlled. Herbs, including bilwa, 
shyonaka, patluppu, gambhari, ami, kantkdri, and 
the entire castor oil plant are made into a decoction 
and used to wash the eyes. Surgery may also be 
indicated. 


Sclerotic Coat (Shuklagata-Roga-Vijnaniya) 

Development and Symptoms: Eleven diseases of the 
sclerotic coat exist. These are all caused by Kapha. 
All these conditions are helped by rock salt, triphala, 
ginger, black pepper, and white coral. The first five 
are known as pterygium. 

1. Prastdiyarma: A thin, extended, reddish-blue 
glandular swelling on the sclerotic coat. This is treated 
by incision. 

2. Shukldrma: A group of soft, white growths, 
developing over the entire sclerotic coat. This is 
treated with incision. 

3. Lohitdmia: A reddish fleshy growth on the cornea. 
This is treated with incision. 






















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


4. Adhi-mansarma: A soft, thick, dark brown, and 
extended fleshy growth on the cornea. This is treated 
by incision. 

5. Sndvvarma: A rough, yellowish or white fleshy 
growth on the white coat that slowly grows larger. 
This is treated with incision. 

6 Shuktikd (xerosis/xerotic Keratitis): Dark brown, 
fleshy or oyster colored specks on the white area of 
the eyeball). Surgery is contraindicated. 

7. Atiuna (ecchvmosis kerato-conjunctivitis): A single 
dot or speck on the cornea that is blood red. Surgery 
is contraindicated. The same therapies apply as for 
Pitta abishyanda. Sugar cane juice, honey, milk, tur¬ 
meric, punarnava, and licorice are used as an eye 
wash or salve. A triphald decoction may also be used 
as eye drops. Turmeric, barberry, guduchi, bilwa, and 
licorice may also be used to wash the eyes. 

8. Pishtaka (pinguecula): A white or transparent, el¬ 
evated, circular dot or speck on the white coat. Sur¬ 
gery is contraindicated. A thin plaster of ginger, 
pippall, musta, black and white pepper may be pasted 
together and used as a salve. 

9. Sird-iala (scleritis): Large red patches of a hard¬ 
ened network of veins spreading over the sclerotic 
coat. It is also treated by incision. 

10. Sira-Pidaka (deep scleritis): A group of white 
pimples on the white coat, near the edge of the iris, 
covered with shreds of veins. Therapy includes 
rasdhjan with honey. It is also treated by incision. 

11. Baldsa Grathita (conjunctivitis): A metal-colored 
speck, covered with veins on the white coat. (Some 
say the speck appears like a drop of water.) Surgery 
is contraindicated. The eye is cleansed by bloodlet¬ 
ting or by using herbs. The herbs include triphald, 
punarnava, nirgundl, chameli, barberry, banyan tree 
(Vdta-ala or ginger) bark (or juice), and rock salt. 
This is followed with the same therapies as Kapha 
ophthalmia. 

Black part of the chorid and iris (Krishna-Gata- 

Roga-Vijnaniya) Development and Symptoms: Four 

diseases related to this area exist. These are all forms 
of calcifications of the cornea. 

Savrana-Shukra (keratitis/comeal ulcer): A puncture¬ 
like dip in the area, pricking sensation, great pain, 
hot secretion. If the seat of the disorder is far from 
the pupil (marginal keratolysis), the entire retina has 


no pain or discharge, if it is not deep-seated or without 
double spots, it can be healed. 

A-vrana-Shukra (comeal opacity): A whitish film 
overlays the choroid region, including the iris, like a 
speck of transparent cloud in the sky, tear secretion, 
slight pain due to ophthalmia (secretion). This is easily 
healed. When a non ulcerated form of this disease is 
thick, deep seated, and chronic, is difficult to heal. If 
it is a chronic situation which is mobile, covered with 
fleshy shreds, full of veins or stretching down to the 
second s kin layer in the eye, it cannot be healed. Other 
unhealable symptoms are obstructed vision, severed 
in the middle and with a reddish tint in the extremities. 
Some authorities also say if spots are on the iris, with 
pimples, and hot tear secretions, it also cannot be 
healed. This is a Kapha disorder. 

Therapies- (for this mi lk -white fleshy growth in the 
eye): The non ulcerated form (a-vrana) follows the 
above blood caused ophthalmia. Should these 
therapies not work, then scarifying is used. The 
ulcerated form (sa-vrana), be it in the first or second 
layers, or rough, one follows the same therapies. 
Scarifying (rubbing) myrrh, black pepper, pippall 
powders on the affected area, and used as a salve is 
useful. 

Eyelid inflammation (Akshi-Pdkdtyaya ) : A milky 
white film over the black part of the eye, slowly 
covering it completely, (and some say) with great pain. 
It is treated with venesection. 

Akshi pdkdtyaya (Akshi-Pdkd, Netra-pdka): 

(Inflammation of the entire eye.) Oil and fomentation 
is done for both swelling (sa-shopha) and non 
swelling (a-shopha) forms. Venesection is then done. 
A triphald decoction is used as eye wash and eye 
drops, nasal evacuatives, and Puta-pdka are also 
applied. 




















Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 19: Ear, Nose, Throat, (Eyes, Mouth) 


Puta-pdka: Triphald and water are first mixed into 
a paste. The paste is then pasted on the bottom side 
of two leaves of Jamum or Vat, and left in the sun to 
dry. After the eyes are cleansed, myrrh, ginger, pippall, 
black pepper, vidahga, ghee, honey, and mi lk are used 
as an eye salve. 

At aka (anterior staphyloma): A reddish painful growth 
rising from below the surface of the black area, with 
red, slimy secretions. The watery accumulation in the 
eye is drained by a needle puncture on either side of 
the cornea, and the hole filled with ghee. 
Chandrodaya varti with honey is used for this 
condition. Scarifying or rubbing is frequently done if 
the punctured area becomes elevated. 


Disease Affecting the Entire Eye 

(Sarva-gata-Roga-Abhishvandha/ 

Conjunctivitis) 

Development. Symptoms and Therapies: Seventeen 
forms of eye diseases affect the eye as a whole. Herbal 
therapies are useful when these diseases are not se¬ 
vere. Only when conditions are serious is venesec¬ 
tion required. 

1-4. Ophthalmia (Abishyanda): Eye inflammation 
(four types) 

a) Vayu —causes pricking eye pain, numbness, 
irritation, roughness, dryness, restricted movement, 
cold tears, lack of secretions, and headache. First, a 
few drops of ghee are applied in the eye. Then the 
forehead, over the eye is fomented. Next, local 
venesection is done. Other useful therapies include, 
oil enema for cleansing, eye drops of triphald, raw 
honey, ghee (tepid in winter, cold in summer). Eight 
drops are used for scarifying, 10 drops for lubricating, 
and 12 drops for healing. Aromatherapy (frankincense 
and sandalwood), eye washes (triphald), and nasal 
evacuative oils using dmalakl, and shatdvari are also 
useful. Plasters of triphald and licorice with milk are 
used as a collyrium for acute Vayu ophthalmia. 
Punarnavd is also useful for all Vayu eye diseases. 
Another recommendation is the mixture of pippall, 
dhataki flowers, rock salt, and 10-year-old ghee. This 
is applied in the eye. 

b) Pitta —burning, inflammatory secretions, 
needing coldness in the eyes, excess hot secretions, 


cloudy vision, yellow eyes. It is treated with 
venesection. Bloodletting, purgatives (rhubarb, castor 
oil, triphald), eye washes, plasters (around eyes), 
medicated nasal oils, eye salves, and Pitta- Visarpa 
(erysipelas) therapies. Herbs include cardamom, 
lodhra, musta, cane sugar, durba, ghee, raw honey, 
red sandalwood, licorice, milk, turmeric, punarnavd, 
vidahga, cardamom. Depending upon the consistency, 
liquid or paste, they may be used as plasters, washes, 
salves, eye drops, or taken internally. 

c) Kapha —desiring warmth, heaviness, itching, 
swelling, excess whiteness, constant deposit and 
discharge of slimy mucus. It is treated with 
venesection. During acute aggravation when 
fomentations does not help, the local vein is opened. 
Nasal drops using fresh herbs (avapida nasya), eye 
salves, aromatherapy, washes, plasters, gargles, puta- 
pdka ruksha. Persons fast every 4 days on ghee 
cooked with arjuna, triphald, musta, sandalwood, 
turmeric, shatdvari, and calamus taken in the 
morning. Lunch and dinner meals should not 
aggravate Kapha. 

Mild fomentation with bilwa and triphald is 
applied around the eye. A thin plaster of triphald, 
ginger, cedar, lodhra, barberry root, and eld 
(cardamom) is applied over the eyelid or entire eye. 
Triphald, licorice, asafoetida, turmeric, licorice, 
ginger, pippall, black pepper, harltakl, vidahga, 
punarnavd, trikatu, musta, and white pepper are 
mixed with water into a paste and applied in the eye 
as a salve. 

d) Blood —red eyes, coppery tears, deep red 
stripes, Pitta symptoms. It is treated with venesection. 
Ghee is taken internally and externally, therapies for 
blood/Pitta and Pitta visarpa are followed, and a Pitta- 
reduction diet is required. 

5-9. Adhimantha (acute glaucoma): All chronic 
types must be quickly treated or excruciating eye pain 
(as if the eye is being tom out) will develop. The pain 
extends upward to half the head, feeling as though it 
is crushing the head. Specific dosha symptoms also 
exist. 

















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


a) Vayu—cloudy eye, feeling as though it is being 
tom out and stirred, is irritating, piercing and painful, 
with local fleshy swelling. The side of the head with 
the affected eye develops symptoms of twisting, 
cracking, swelling, and shivering. It is treated with 
venesection (also see Vayu ophthalmia therapies). 

b) Pitta —blood-streaked eye, secretions, burning 
sensation in the eye and head, swelling, perspiration, 
eye secretion, yellowed vision, fainting, liver-colored 
eyes and feeling ulcerated. It is treated with 
venesection (also see Pitta ophthalmia). 

c) Kapha—swollen eyes, slight congestion 
(inflammation), cold, itching heavy secretions, slimy 
deposits of mucus, slight clouding, dilated nostrils, 
headaches, objects are seen as dusty. It is treated with 
venesection. See Kapha ophthalmia therapies. 

d) Blood—pricking pain and blood-streaked 
secretions of the eye, bright red eyes, unbearable to 
touch, objects seem as if on fire, eye extremities 
become red, cornea (white coat of the eye) looks as if 
it is submerged in blood. It is treated with venesection. 
See blood ophthalmia therapies. 

If one does not follow a wholesome diet 
(according to the excessed dosha) blindness may 
occur (within 3 days for Pitta, 6 days for Vayu, 5 
days for blood, and 7 days for Kapha). 

10. Netra-pdka: 

a) Swelling (Sa-shopha )—itching, mucus deposits 
in the eye, teary secretions, redness, burning, coppery 
colored, heavy, pricking pain, swelling, constantly 
secreting cold or hot slimy discharges, eventually 
forming pus. It can only be treated with venesection. 

b) Nonswelling (A-shopha )—the same symptoms 
except swelling. It is treated with venesection. Blood- 
purifying herbs and diuretics, such as mahjishtha and 
gokshura, respectively are useful. 

11. Blinding Eye Inflammation (Hatadhimantha): 

Excessed Vayu becomes caught in the optic nerve. 
This is incurable. 

12. Vdyu-Parydya: Shifting pain in the eye lashes (or 
just the eyebrows and eyes). The same measures as 
Vayu ophthalmia are used, including, ingesting large 
amounts of ghee before the meal with dashmul, 
trikatu, tagar, mahjishtha, barberry, figs, kantkdrl, and 
musta. It may also be treated with venesection. 


13. Shushkd-kashi-pdka: Eyelids become dry, hard, 
remain closed. Vision is cloudy and hazy vision. Great 
pain is experienced when opening the eyelids. Sur¬ 
gery is contraindicated. Cedar, powered ginger, milk, 
and ghee are mixed and used as a collyrium. Ingest¬ 
ing ghee with bald, shatdvari and licorice, and drop¬ 
ping this liquid in the eye is also useful. Alternatively, 
dry ginger and rock salt can be used internally or as 
eye drops. Nasal oil of brdhmi and triphald ghee is 
helpful, as are eye washes of milk with black salt or 
mi lk cooked with cedar. 

14. Anyato-vdyu: excessed Vayu in the head, ears, 
cheek bones, back of the neck, the nerves on either 
side of the neck (the manyd mannas) causes great 
pain in the eyes or eye brows. It is treated with ven¬ 
esection. The same measures as Vayu ophthalmia are 
used, including ingesting large amounts of ghee be¬ 
fore the meal with a decoction of bilwa, gdmbhdrl, 
sonapatta, patola, ajwan, and sarsaparilla. This de¬ 
coction is also used as an ointment. 

15. Amladhyushita-Drishti: Eating excessive amounts 
of acidic foods (or from acid indigestion) causes the 
eyes to swell and develop a bluish red tint. Surgery is 
contraindicated. The same therapies as Pitta 
ophthalmia are used, and triphald ghee. 

16. Sirotpdta (hyperemia conjunctivitis): The veins 
throughout the eye become coppery, with or without 
pain. If not quickly attended to, copious discharges 
of transparent and coppery color develop, leading to 
complete blindness. Rasdhjan is advised, i.e., bar¬ 
berry, vamsha lochana, white pepper, samudra phena 
(os sepiae or cuttlefish bone), and phitkdri (alum, 
sulfate of alumina and potash or of aluminum and 
ammonium; aluminous sulfate) mixed with honey. 
Additional therapies include honey and ghee as an 
eye salve. It is also treated with venesection. 



T / 



















Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 19: Ear, Nose, Throat, (Eyes, Mouth) 


17. Sira-harsha (orbital cellulitis): If sirotpata is 

not quickly treated, large amounts of transparent 
and coppery eye secretions develop and cause 
blindness. Therapies include rhubarb, musta, and 
amcilatas mixed with honey, and used as an eye salve. 
It is also treated with venesection. 


Pupil Diseases (Drishti-gata-Roga-Vijnaniya) 

Development and Symptoms: There are 12 diseases 
of the pupils. One disease affects the coating over the 
entire pupil. 

1st Pupil Coat (Patala): When the excessed doshas 
pass into the eye’s innermost coat through the veins, 
objects appear dim and hazy. 

2nd Pupil Coat: When excessed doshas are found in 
the second coat, false images appeal - before the eyes 
(of bugs, hair, nets, cobwebs, circular patches, flags, 
and earrings), objects appear covered in mist, haze, 
as if underwater, or seen through colored droplets 
falling in all directions. 

3rd Pupil Coat: When the excessed doshas reach the 
third coat, one only sees higher placed objects, and 
cannot see objects below a certain level. If the crys¬ 
talline lens is affected, objects reflect the colors of 
the lens. Objects seem covered with cloth. One does 
not see ears, eyes, noses etc. on other people. When 
the doshas affect the lower area of the crystalline lens 
blocks near vision, affecting the upper area causes 
distant blocking, and excessed doshas in the lateral 
areas blocks lateral vision. When the doshas affect 
the entire lens, objects are seen as dim and confused. 
If the middle part of the lens is affected, objects ap¬ 
pear to be cut in two. When the doshas are in two 
places, there is triple vision. A multi-image of ob¬ 
jects develops when the doshas are all over the lens. 
4th Pupil Coat: Loss of vision (timira) results from 
excessed doshas being trapped in this area. Superfi¬ 
cial excesses only allow for the vision of bright ob¬ 
jects, whereas deep-seated excesses cause blindness. 


Six Healable Diseases 

All six healable diseases of the pupil and lens, the 
local veins, loss of vision (timira), cataracts (kdcha), 
linga-ndsha, Vayu, Pitta, Kapha, blood (rakta), 
tridosha, and parimldyi are bled, persons are duly 
purged using ghee mixed with herbal purgatives. 

Vayu symptoms of all six diseases: 

Castor oil with boiled milk is used as a purgative. 

Pitta/blood symptoms of all six diseases: 

Triphald ghee is used as a purgative. 


1. Blindness (Timira): 

Triphald ghee is useful in all types of timira. Na¬ 
sal evacuatives with sesame oil are also goo for all 
forms of this disease. 

Vayu-caused blindness requires triphald mixed 
with sesame oil. Kapha-caused Timira needs triphald 
mixed with honey. Pitta-caused therapy involves 
goat’s milk: boiled with kdkoli, kshlr kdkoll, honey, 
licorice, and saraswat. Vayu doshas use a decoction 
of ashwagandha, bilwa, and shatdvari. Kapha dosluis 
inhale smoke of vidahga, patta (corchorus 
capsularis), apdmdrga seed, and hingot bark pow¬ 
ders. Also, an ointment of vat, pippall, kdkoli, tur¬ 
meric, and fig tree bark (anjir) is useful. 

An eye salve using ghee, honey, salt, licorice is 
useful. Ingestibles for all causes of blindness include 
ghee, triphald, shatdvari, dmalaki, and barley. Blood¬ 
letting is never used for this disease if the eye is red 
as it will aggravate the condition. 

If a lack of redness exists, and the disease in only 
in the first coat, the disease is healable. When red¬ 
ness develops, and the second coat is affected, it is 
very difficult to heal. Should the third coat be affected, 
showing redness on the first coat, it is only control¬ 
lable. 

Vayu Blindness —objects appear cloudy, moving, 
crooked and red. This cannot be healed. Therapies 
include triphald, shatdvari, and sesame 



7 

















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


oil paste is eaten. Another therapy is amalaki, rock 
salt, pippall (in equal amounts), and a little black 
pepper. All these herbs are mixed and taken with 
honey. Yogurt water may be taken as well. 

Pitta Blindness —objects seem to be rainbow-colored, 
lik e a flash of lightning, the feathers of a peacock or 
with a dark blue-black tint. Therapies include triphala 
ghee paste is eaten. Sarsaparilla, licorice, cane sugar, 
and honey are applied as an ointment. Lodhra, eld, 
punamavd mixed with honey can also be used as an 
ointment. 

Kapha Blindness —objects appear with a thick cloud- 
white coating in a dull, oily, hazy, or as though looking 
through water. This is a progressively developing 
cataract. Triphala and honey are eaten. Sarsaparilla, 
dry ginger and dry molasses cakes are applied to the 
eyes. 

Blood Blindness —objects appear red, gray, black, or 
multicolored, or enveloped in gloom. Lodhra, 
triphala, punamavd, rose water applied as a collyrium 
(black powder). Another therapy is sandalwood, 
shildjit, kesar, neem gum, and white lotus, made into 
a collyrium. 

Tridosha Blindness —objects seem variegated and 
confused with double or triple vision, with stars and 
planets appearing broken, or with additional 
armatures, and floating. Chandrodaya varti can 
probably heal this condition. Otherwise, it cannot be 
healed. 

Pitta/Blood: (Parimldyi) The comers of the sky seem 
yellow and bright like a sunrise, trees appear to sparkle 
with lights l ik e fireflies. The same therapies as Pitta 
cataracts are used here. Should this not balance the 
doshas, salves and nasal oils are also applied. 

Cataract (Kdcha) Therapy: This is a corneal 
calcification preventing persons from seeing. 

Vdyu: Ghee, milk, and triphala as an eye salve. 
Pitta: Ghee is used as nose oil and as a meal. Triphala 
is ingested. Puta-pdka and an eye salve of patola 
patra, punamavd, red sandalwood, barberry, amalaki, 
and lodhra. 

Kapha: Triphala and sesame oil are cooked together 
and used as a nasal oil, aromatherapy using vidahga, 
patola patra, punamavd, turmeric, red sandalwood, 
amalaki, and lodhra. Ghee and honey are mixed with 
these honey. This mixture is applied to the eye as 


puta-paka. 

Tridosha: Triphala decoction and licorice are used 
as a salve, in puta-pdka and as food. 

Linga-nasha (cataract): Surgery is required. 
Sometimes, therapies of barberry with honey, or 
chandrodaya varti with honey may be helpful. 

Vdyu —reddish-looking pupils, circular patches 
that move around, and are rough to the touch. This 
cannot be healed. 

Pitta —blue, yellow-blue or metal-colored 
circular patches and pupils. This cannot be healed. 

Kapha —whitish pupils circular patches are thick, 
oily and white, looking like a drop of water. It moves 
when the eye is rubbed. This cannot be healed. 
Blood —blood-red pupils. 

Tridosha —pupils are multicolored with symptoms 
of the different doshas. This cannot be healed. 

Pitta/Blood —a blue or yellow blue circular patch, 
looking like a blade of grass on the pupil. Occasional 
glimpses of light are possible. 

Two forms of linga-nasha due to trauma also exist. 
Surgery is contraindicated for these diseases. 

1. Sa-nimitta (determined origin): Loss of sight 
resulting from overheating of the brain (causes include 
inhaled poisons) and toxicity in the blood. The pupil 
is sunken, pierced, or impaired. Triphala ghee is 
advised in this condition. 

2. A-nimitta (undetermined origin): Loss of vision 
resulting from excessively bright lights, including that 
of celestial beings. The eye is not outwardly affected. 
Triphala ghee or gdmbhdrl flower, licorice, lodhra, 
and barberry are suggested. 

Pupil and Crystalline Lens Therapies : Three of these 
diseases can be healed, three are incurable, and six 
can only be controlled. The general therapies are again 
suggested. g 

























Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 19: Ear, Nose, Throat, (Eyes, Mouth) 


Pitta -Vidaghda-Drishti: Pupils and objects appear 
yellowish, persons only have night vision. It is caused 
by excess Pitta in the third coat. Surgery is 
contraindicated. All the therapies for Pitta (except 
surgery) are used here. Triphald ghee is also very 
good for this condition. Gambier flowers, licorice, 
lodhra, and barberry are also suggested. 

Kapha -vidagha-drishti: Kapha appearing over the 
three parts of the lens, causing objects to be seen 
whitish and night blindness. Surgery is 
contraindicated. All the therapies for Kapha (except 
surgical operations) are used here. Traivritci ghee is 
very good for this condition. Also, nirgundi seed, eld, 
and pippali, mixed with goat’s milk is suggested. 
For Pitta and Kapha vidagdha-drishtis, eye salves are 
used with myrrh, pippali, pepper, ashoka, triphald, 
and kapikachhu mixed with honey. 

Kapha Vidhagha (night blindness): Myrrh, pippali, 
ginger, licorice, triphald, and bald are used on the 
eye and also ingested. A salve consisting of triphald, 
myrrh, pippali, and cardamom mixed with honey is 
also useful. 

Dhuma-dnshti or Dhfima-darshin 
(Smoky vision): Objects seem dusty or smoky 
resulting from grief, high and prolonged fevers, 
straining, excessive physical exercise, or head injuries. 
Surgery is contraindicated. The same healing 
therapies as Pitta ophthalmia are suggested. Ghee is 
taken internally and externally, therapies for blood/ 
Pitta and Pitta visarpa are followed. A Pitta reduction 
diet is required. 

Hrasva-Jatya (Day blindness): Cold weather causes 
a loss of Pitta that creates difficulty with seeing small 
objects in the daytime that may easily be seen at night. 
A combination of myrrh, licorice, triphald, ghee, and 
honey is used as an eye salve. 

Nakulandhyata: The pupil seems to emit luminous 
flashes and day vision appears multicolor. This is 
treated similarly to night-blindness. 

Gambhirikd (paralysis of the canial nerve): Excess 
Vayu contracts the pupil and deforms it, causing it to 


sink in its socket. It is associated with extreme pain. 

Scarifying/Rubbing (Lekhana) : 

This therapy requires licensed medical care, and will 
not be discussed in detail here. Vartma-vabandha, 
klishta-vartma, bahala-vartma, pothaki eye diseases 
are gently scraped, then scarified. Shydva-vartma and 
kardama-vartma diseases are moderately rubbed 
(neither too light nor too deep). Small, hard coppery 
pus pimples that may arise from rubbing are cut. Small 
and slightly swollen pimples on the exterior eyelid 
surface are fomented and plastered. 

Incisions: 

General: Before pus develops, oil and light 
fomentation are administered to the eye. Once pus 
has developed, therapies for healing an ulcer are used. 

Visha-granthi: First fomentation is conducted, then 
holes are cut to remove swelling. This is followed by 
dusting with myrrh and cardamom powder. Ghee and 
honey are applied over the dust and a loose bandage 
is applied. 

Upandha: The area is opened and rubbed with pippali 
and myrrh powders mixed with honey. It is then 
scraped, and the surrounding area is also gently 
scratched. 

Excisions: Only surgeons are qualified to perform 
exicsions. Diseases requiring excision include arman, 
sird-jdla, sira-pidaka, parvanikd, and the inner eyelid. 

Shukti-pdka: (Inflammatory diseases, such as ble¬ 
pharitis, styes, conjunctivitis, etc.) The same thera¬ 
pies as Pitta ophthalmia are used, and triphald ghee. 
An eye salve with cooling herbs (e.g., musta, vidahga) 
is useful for lower eye disorders. 

Ariun and Sulel: General therapies are used. 






















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Eye Therapy Glossary 

Triphala may be ingested and used as an eyewash 
(after straining). Depending upon the dosha 
responsible for the illness, herbs are used to reduce 
the dosha excess. 


Soothing (tarpana): 

These remedies are used in the morning or 
afternoon after nasal purgation, elimination of stool 
and digestion of the previous meal. (Technically, the 
planets should be auspiciously situated.) Persons lie 
on a bed in a clean, draftless room where the sun 
does not get in their eyes. 

The eyelids are thickly coated with a paste of black 
gram and water and built as a circular wall to surround 
the eye. Ghee and tepid water are poured within the 
wall, in the eye, up to the eye lashes (see Netra Bash 
in Chapter 7 page 244). Healthy Kapha-, Pitta-, and 
Vayu-imbalanced persons should allow the ghee to 
remain in their eyes for 3 periods of time: 8 minutes/ 
20 seconds, 10 minutes, and 16 minutes/20 seconds 
respectively. Other authorities suggest the length of 
retention varies according to what part of the eye is 
affected: sandhi—-five minutes, vart-man —eight 
minutes/20 seconds, white (shukla) —11 minutes/45 
seconds, black (krishna) —16 minutes/45 seconds. 
For diseases affecting the entire eye—13 minutes/20 
seconds. Still, others say that such eye diseases require 
16 minutes/45 seconds, and diseases affecting the 
pupils require 30 minutes. 

The ghee is then released through the inner comer 
of the eye. Kapha becomes excessed in this area and 
is then relieved by inhaling Kapha-reducing aromas 
such as cedar, frankincense, or myrrh. This continues 
for 1, 3, or 5 days for Vayu, Pitta, and Kapha, 
respectively, or some say for mild, moderate, and 
severe symptoms, respectively. 

Tarpana is used for symptoms of shriveling or 
debilitation of the eyelashes, cloudy and dark vision, 
arched vision, no tears, parched eye, hard eyelids, 
and severe diseases of the eye. 

Precautions: Tarpana is not used on cloudy, very 
hot or very cold days. Persons who are anxious or 
fearful should not use tarpana. Nor should it be used 
before major symptoms have cleared up. 


Puta-paka: 

Three forms exist: 

1. Emulsives (snehana) —used in very dry conditions. 

2. Scraping (lekhana) —used when oil is frequently 
applied to the eye. 

3. Healing ( ropana ) —used when eye diseases are 
healed. 


Preparation: 

1. Emulsives — ghee with shatdvarl, bald and licorice, 
are held in the eye for 3 minutes/20 seconds. 

2. Scraping — ghee with pravdlpishti or salt (scraping 
properties), and are used for 1 minute/45 seconds. 

3. Healing — ghee, milk, raw honey, and herbs such 
as mahjishthd, barberry, turmeric, neem, chamell, 
sandalwood, bilwa, ajwan, and onion. These herbs 
are kept in the eye for 5 minutes. 

Puta-paka is done from 1 to 3 days, 1 day for 
Kapha disorders or for scraping measures, 2 days for 
Pitta eye diseases or emulsive therapy, 3 days for Vayu 
eye disorders or healing puta-paka. 

Oil, fomentation and aromas are used for 
emulsives and scraping puta-paka, but not for the 
healing version. Persons must carefully follow their 
diets and life-styles (according to their dosha) for 
twice as long as the therapy lasts. 

Proper use of tarpana and puta-paka results in 
clearing of the symptoms involved, whereas improper 
use will result in a worsening of vision, pain and other 
unhealthy symptoms. 

Precautions: Follow all the precautions of tarpana, 
nasal evacuatives, and internal oils. After the doshas 
are rebalanced, all precautions are met and tarpana 
is applied, puta-paka is then used. 

Upon completion of tarpana, one should not stare 
at bright lights, including the sun, a fire, or any 
luminous object. Further, one is required to prevent 
wind gusts from hitting the eye. If these precautions 
are not followed and the eyes are hurt, or if they are 
hurt from improper puta-paka and tarpana remedies, 
eye salves, drops, nasal evacuatives, aromatherapy, 
and fomentation can alleviate the troubles. 

Procedure: General herbal therapies are used. 
















Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 19: Ear, Nose, Throat, (Eyes, Mouth) 


Sprinkling (sheka) and Eye 
drops (aschyotana): 

(See Chapter 7- Pancha Karina page 243 for more 
details). Eye drops are used for mild diseases of the 
eye, and sprinkling is used for severe symptoms. 
Three forms of these therapies exist, just l ik e puta- 
pdka, 

Scraping (lekhana) —7 to 8 drops 

E mulsive (sehana) —10 drops 

Healing (ropana) —12 drops 

Some say eye drops are held as long as puta-pdka, 
and sprinkling is held in the eye for twice as long. 
Others say that both are held in the eye twice as long 
as puta-pdka. Both therapies are applied in the morn¬ 
ing, afternoon, or evening (depending upon the dosha 
imbalanced), or whenever there is eye pain. Again, 
proper application results in feeling better, whereas 
improper application results in feeling worse. (This 
is stated because there is a belief in many holistic 
circles that detoxification causes one to feel worse 
before they feel better. This is not so with Ayurvedic 
therapies, except for some s ki n conditions). 

Head Bladders (shiro-basti ); (See Chapter 7— Pancha 
Karina page 240). This is used for various head dis¬ 
orders. After receiving purgatives and emetics (de¬ 
pending upon the dosha imbalance), and having eaten 
according to the doshas imbalanced, persons are ready 
for shiro basti. In the evening, sitting erect, a bladder 
or cone that will not leak from oil placed inside it, is 
placed on the head, and firmly tied around the fore¬ 
head. Emulsive oil is poured inside the cone, to al¬ 
low the head to soak in the oil. (Some authorities use 
various pastes between the cone and the forehead to 
prevent leaks.) The head is soaked for 10 times or as 
long as the time the tarpana is held in the eye. 

Eye salves (ahjana) : There are three forms of eye 
salves: 

1. Scraping ( lekhana ) —herbs used may be of one or 
more taste, except sweet (i.e., sour, salty, pungent, 
bitter, astringent). The tastes used will depend upon 
the dosha imbalanced. Vayu: sour and salty 
Pitta: astringent 

Kapha: pungent, bitter, astringent 


Blood: astringent 

Dual/Tri-Doshas —combinations of the tastes When 
an excess of the doshas exists in the eye, eyelids, in 
the eyeball, its passages and capillaries, and in the 
nose gristle, they are secreted through the mouth, 
nostrils, and comers of the eye through the application 
of scraping salves. 

2. Healing (ropana) —Herbs used contain bitter and 
astringent tastes, mixed with a little ghee. This cooling 
therapy brings color and strength to the eye. 

3. Invigorating (prasadana) —Sweet herbs are used 
with a large amount of ghee. This tones and invigo¬ 
rates the vision. 

Punamavd or chandrodaya salves are used in the 
morning for Kapha disorders, afternoon for Pitta im¬ 
balances, and evening with deranged Vayu. Other 
authorities say scraping is done in the morning, heal¬ 
ing in the afternoon, and invigorating at night. A third 
opinion to sue them according to the seasonal doshas. 

Salves may be in pill, liquid and powder form, and 
may be used for serious, moderate, and mild symp¬ 
toms. A typical dose is 4 to 6 gms 

Procedure: The eyelids are made to slant with the 
left-hand fingers while the salve is applied with the 
right hand. The salve is applied from the cornea to 
the apahga (comers) and back again (along the inner 
eyelid). It is repeated two or three times. A rod is 
used for the inside eyelid, and the finger is used on 
the outer eyelid. 

The salve is only thinly pasted in the comers of the 
eye (from the cornea to the comer) so as not to hurt 
the area. Only after the doshas are reduced is the eye 
to be washed, otherwise the symptoms might be fur¬ 
ther aggravated. First the eye is washed with water. 
Pratyanjana [sarsaparilla, honey, sugar, licorice, and 
relegar mainshil (antimony sulfide) mixed with wa¬ 
ter] is then used depending upon the dosha 
imbalanced or one’s constitution. 













The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Herbs: Triphald, myrrh, punarnavd, kushtha, 
sandalwood, cardamom, licorice, pippali, black 
pepper, jatdmdnshl, manjishtha, cedar, lodhra, 
barberry, and tdllspatra. 

Precautions: Anjana is not used when there is fever, 
ucldvarta, with head diseases, during anger, grief, fear, 
crying, intoxication, constipation, or urine retention 
because it might cause tears, pain, redness, blindness, 
swelling, or giddiness. It is not to be used with 
insomnia as it may cause blindness. Anjana is not to 
be used on windy days, as it may cause impairment 
to the sight. 

When the eyes have dust or smoke in them, anjana 
may cause redness, ophthalmia, or tears. It is not used 
after nasal therapies as it may cause aching and eye 
swelling. Any head disease will be further aggravated 
by using anjana. It is not used before sunrise, after 
bathing, on very cold days, or with indigestion. When 
the doshas are imbalanced, anjana should not be used. 

This is especially true for scraping anjana. Instead, 
these symptoms are treated with washing the eyes 
with water, drops, plasters, smoke, nasal therapies, 
and gargles, depending upon the symptoms of the 
imbalanced doshas. 

As with other therapies, proper application of 
scraping anjana results in improved conditions, 
whereas improper application (excess or deficient 
application) results in increased troubles. For 
improper application, the anjana is completely 
removed through using nasal therapies, anjana, and 
steam therapy. 

Invigorating and healing salves are applied prop¬ 
erly when the symptoms are soothed. Excess or defi¬ 
cient application results in aggravation of symptoms. 
To heal excess and deficient application ,puta-pdka, 
aromas, and nasal therapies are used. 


External Eye Injury Nayana- 
bhighata- Pratishedha 

Causes and Symptoms: Violent, unbearable eye pain 
with redness and swelling, caused by injury to the 
eye, or resulting from excess fomentation, smoke, 
glare, fear, or agony, is healed by nasal therapies, 
plasters, sprinkling (seka), soothing (tarpana) 
measures, puta-pdka, and all therapies for Pitta and 
blood conjunctivitis (abishyanda). Cool, sweet, and 
bulk-promoting herbs are also useful. 

For excess fomentation, smoke, glare, fear, agony, 
pain, or injury, these therapies are used during the 
first week of the disease. Afterwards, therapies 
identical to those used for conjunctivitis (depending 
upon the excessed dosha) are employed. Mild 
conditions may be immediately relieved by applying 
warm breath fomentation (steam in the mouth). 

If ulceration is on only one coating of the eye, it is 
easily healed. When two coats are affected healing it 
is difficult. If three coats are affected it cannot be 
healed. When eye looseness, dislocation, sunkeness, 
deep impressions, or loss of vision exist, the situation 
is only containable. Poor vision with pupil dilation, 
without extreme redness or eyeball dislocation, and 
good vision are signs that therapies will be helpful. 

To raise a sunken eye, holding one’s breath, 
causing vomiting, sneezing, or choking the windpipe 
is useful. If the eyes are hanging from the sockets, it 
is reinstalled without damaging the nerves, and gently 
pressed with the palms (with a lotus leaf between the 
pupil and the palm). The eye is then filled with a 
tarpana of milk, and medicated ghee. This liquid is 
also used as a nasal therapy. Long breaths of air are 
taken through the nostrils, and cold water is poured 




N 


V 










Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 19: Ear, Nose, Throat, (Eyes, Mouth) 


Infant Inner Eyelid Disorder (Kukunaka-opthalmia): 

Vayu, Pitta, Kapha, and blood may become 
imbalanced owing to poor quality of breast mi lk. 
Symptoms include excess itching of the eyes, 
frequently rubbing the eyes, nose, and forehead with 
fists. Tears are constant, and sunlight is unbearable. 

Therapies first involve blood-letting (with 
leeches), scraping with rough leaves, and then rubbing 
with trikatu and honey paste. The mother follows 
therapies described earlier for improving the quality 
of breast milk. The child should be given black salt, 
honey, pippall, jamun (a black, sweet fruit in India), 
dmalaki, mango leaves and bark, neem, guduchl, and 
ghee as an emetic. Therapy is stopped when the child 
begins to vomit. 

If the child is drinking breast milk and solid foods, 
the emetic is given with calamus. For older children 
no longer drinking breast milk, the emetic is given 
with rock salt, apdmdrga (kapikachhu) seed , pippall, 
mainsphal, and milk. The eyes are washed and 
sprinkled, and eye drops of triphald and guduchl ghee 
are applied. Salves of black pepper, myrrh, trikatu, 
onion, licorice, neem, turmeric, lodhra, and 
punamavd, pasted with honey and water are useful. 


Mouth Cavity (Mukha Roga) 

These diseases include the lips (usth), gums 
(dantmul), teeth (dantaka), tongue (jihvd), palate 
(tdlu-gata) i.e., tonsillitis, throat/larynx (kanta roga), 
entire mouth cavity (savra-sara). 

Diseases covered under this section include 
gingivitis, tartar, tooth abscess, and laryngitis. 

Causes: There are 65 diseases of the mouth cavity: 
8 Up disorders, 15 gum problems, 8 tooth ills, 5 tongue 
concerns, 9 palate complaints, 17 throat conditions, 
and 3 maladies of the entire cavity. 

Two forms of healing are available for all 
disorders: 

Gandusha: One sits in a darkened room with no draft, 
while the neck and shoulders are massaged and 
sudated. The mouth is fil led with liquid and held, until 
there is no room for movement, or until the nose and 
eyes begin to tear. 


Kavala (gargling): The directions are the same as 
gandusha, only half the mouth is filled with the 
liquids, so there is room to gargle. All the herbs and 
discussed below are used here as well. Either approach 
can be used, gandusha or kavala. 

Therapies: Tingling or pains associated with the teeth 
(Vayu excesses): sesame oil, warm water. (Perhaps 
the calcium in sesame oil heals tooth and gum 
problems.) Triphald decoction is one of the best 
general remedies for oral diseases. It can be used for 
either kavala or gandusha. 

Incurable Mouth Diseases 

Mouth: Caused by imbalanced muscle, blood, or 
tridoshic causes: 

Gums: Tridoshic sinus in the gums (nadl vrana) and 
tridoshic shaushira (gingivitis with cavity). Teeth: 
Shyava-dantaka (black or blue discoloration on teeth), 
dalana (toothache), and bhanjana (chipped tooth). 
Tongue: Aldsa. 

Palate: Arvuda (palate cancer). 

Throat: Valaya (tumor), vrinda (large tumor), baldsa 
(sarcoma), shataghni (malignant growths), 
inflammatory swelling (vidarl), tridoshic 
inflammatory swelling (mdmsatdna), rohini. 

Tumors and palate cancer require surgery as well 
as detoxifying herbs (see Chapter 22). For impacted 
teeth (adhimamsaka) additional herbs of vachd, 
pippall, and neem are used, followed by 
shirovirechana, snuff and inhaling smoke. 

For throat edema, tonsillitis, palatal abscess, acute 
superficial glossitis, gingivitis, dental abscess, goiter, 
and hyperthyroidism, see the Metabolic System; 
Chapter 25. 















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Mouth, and Tooth Disorders (Mukha Roga) 

Causes: Over-eating animal products, milk, and yo¬ 
gurt causes gum and tooth disorders, as well as an 
excess of all three doshas with a predominance of 
Kapha. 

Lips: 

Vayu causes lips to become rough, hard, 
immovable, painful, and to develop cracks and 
fissures. 

Pitta excesses cause painful inflammatory 
elevations with burning. Ulcers and are yellowish. 

Kapha increases cause the lips to develop slightly 
painful elevations (papules). Lips are unctuous, cold, 
and heavy. 

Tridoshic excesses cause black, yellow, or white 
lips, with a bumpy appearance or having several 
elevations. 

Blood (rakta) excesses cause red elevations that 
discharge blood. 

Muscle (mamsa) excesses cause lips to become 
heavy, thick, lumpy, with discharges from the comers 
of the mouth that contain worms. 

Lat (medas) excesses cause lips to appear shiny 
like ghee, develop heaviness, and exude large 
quantities of a clear fluid. Ulcers can form and not 
heal. Lips do not return to their normal softness. 

External injury can cause bleeding, swelling, or 
itching. 

Gum Disorders (Dantamula Roga) 

Bleeding, Spongy Gums (shitada) with foul smell, 
blackening, oozing, soft, tearing muscle, and pus 
formation result from excess Kapha and blood (rakta). 

Gum Swelling/Gingivitis (dantapupputaka) [of 
2 or 3 teeth] is also caused by Kapha and rakta. See 
the Metabolic System Chapter (25). 

Pus, Blood, Shaky Teeth /Bleeding Gingivitis/ 
Pyorrhea (dantaveshta) are caused by bad blood. 

Swelling at the root of a tooth ( shaushira) causes 
excess saliva. This is caused by Kapha and rakta. 

Loose Teeth, Palate Lissure and shaushira 
symptoms (mahdshaushira) are caused by all three 
doshas. Herbal therapies are not useful for this 
condition. 

Gum Decay and Bleeding (paridara) result from 


excess Pitta, rakta, and Kapha. 

Burning Gums, Ulcers, Shaky Teeth (upa-kusha) 
result from excess Pitta and rakta. 

Gum Chaffing, Burning, Ulcers, Shaky Teeth 
(vaidarbha) result from trauma. 

Extra Tooth [growing over an existing tooth] 
causes severe pain during growth (khalivard-hana) 
results from excess Vayu. 

Irregular or Ugly Teeth (kardla) result from excess 
Vayu. No therapy exists for this condition. 

Large Swelling at Last Molar causes great pain and 
dribbling saliva (adhimamsaka) is caused by excess 
Kapha. 

Gum Sinus Ulcers (ndcli vrana) [five kinds] are 
similar to those discussed in Chapter 16, page 405. 

Tooth Disorders (Danta Roga) 

Toothache (dalana) results from excess Vayu. 

Black Holes in Teeth, Bleeding, Swollen, Painful 
(krimidantaka) is caused by excess Vayu. 

Irregular Shape of Pace and Teeth (bhah-janaka) 
is caused by excess Vayu and Kapha. 

Sensitive Teeth ( dantaharsha) results from excess 
Pitta and Vayu. 

Tooth Tartar (dantsharkara) results from Pitta and 
Vayu. In addition to herbal therapies, scraping, 
dusting and snuff are required. 

Excess Tartar, Plakes and Decay (kapdlikd). This 
is very difficult to heal. 

Black or Blue Teeth ( shyavadantaka) results from 
Pitta and rakta. Herbal therapies are not useful for 
this condition. 

Gum Abscess (with pus and blood, burning and 
pain) (dantavidradhi) is discussed under Metabolic 
System, Chapter 25. 

Tongue Disorders (Jihwa Roga) 

Vayu excesses cause fissures, loss of sensation, 
and are leaf-like in appearance. 

Pitta excesses cause burning sensations with 
studded elevations and reddish thorny lesions. 

Kapha excesses cause thickness, swelling, and 
muscular sprouts. 

Large Swelling (aldsa) has symptoms of excess 
Kapha and rakta, making it difficult to move the 







Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 19: Ear, Nose, Throat, (Eyes, Mouth) 


tongue. An ulcer develops at the root of the tongue. 
This condition cannot be helped with herbs. 

Salivary Cyst ( upajihva) is a severe swelling under 
the tip of the tongue caused by Kapha and rakta. 
Symptoms include excess salivation, itching and 
localized burning sensation. This is discussed in 
Chapter 25, page 533. 

Palate Disorders (Talugata Roga) 

Enlarged uvula (kanta shundi) is caused by excess 
Kapha and rakta. Symptoms include thirst, cough, 
and difficulty swallowing. Herbs are used after 
surgery. 

Hard Swelling (tundikerl) is an advanced stage 
of enlarged uvula. Symptoms include burning 
sensation and pus or ulcer. 

Soft Swelling (adhrusha) is caused by excess rakta 
with fever and severe pain. 

Palatal Tumor (kachapa) is caused by excess 
Kapha. It develops slowly and is painless. See Chapter 
22 for cancer therapies. 

Palate Cancer (taluarbuda) is a swelling at the 
palate center caused by excess rakta. This condition 
is painless. Herbs are used after surgery (see Chapter 
22 ). 

Benign Tumor (mamsa sanghata) is caused by 
Kapha it is called mamsa-sanghata. This swelling is 
painless. Herbs are used after surgery (see Chapter 
22 ). 

Fatty Cysts (tdlu pupputa) is caused by Kapha and 
fat. Small papule sized, it is painless and does not 
move. 

Dryness (tdlushosha) results from excess Vayu. 
Symptoms include difficulty breathing. Ulcer (tdlu 
pdka) results from excess Pitta. 


Throat Disorders (Kantha Roga) 

Rohini: All three doshas become excessed and 
invade the muscle tissue (mamsa dhatu) and blood 
( rakta), causing sprouts in the throat that obstruct the 
throat and may lead to death. Any of the doshas can 
predominate. —Vayu excesses cause severe pain over 
the surface of the tongue (and other symptoms of 
Vayu abscess—see Chapter 16) —Pitta excesses 


cause sprouts that quickly appear, develop pus and 
ulcer. These are accompanied by a high fever and 
other symptoms of Pitta abscess. 

—Kapha excesses cause large, hard, immovable 
sprouts that totally block the throat. —Tridosha (equal 
strength of the doshas) cause deeply rooted sprouts. 
This condition is incurable. 

—Rakta sprouts are small, with red papules and 
symptoms of Pitta abscess. 

Small Tumors (kanta shdluka) are caused by 
excess Kapha. They are hard, immovable and can 
only be healed by surgery. Detoxifying herbs are used 
thereafter for prevention of further growths (see 
Chapter 22). 

Swollen adenoids ( adhijihva) is caused by excess 
Kapha and rakta, causing a swelling at the back of 
the tongue. If pus or ulcer develop, herbal therapy is 
not useful. Detoxifying herbs are following surgery 
for prevention of further growths (see Chapter 22). 

Tumor (valaya) results from excess Kapha and 
obstructs the passage of food. This condition can not 
be healed with herbs. Detoxifying herbs are used after 
surgery for prevention of further growths (see Chapter 
22 ). 

Sarcoma (baldsa) is caused by excess Kapha and 
Vayu causing swelling, difficulty breathing, pain, and 
vital organ pain. This condition cannot be healed with 
herbs. Detoxifying herbs are used after surgery for 
prevention of further growths (see Chapter 22). 

Tumor (ekavrinda) is a round, elevated swelling 
with burning sensations, itching, hardness. It does not 
develop pus or ulcer. It is caused by Kapha and rakta. 
This condition cannot be healed with herbs. 
Detoxifying herbs are used after surgery for 
prevention of further growths (see Chapter 22). 






The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Large Tumor (vrinda) is caused by Pitta and blood. 
It is an elevated, round swelling with severe burning 
sensation and high fever. If Vayu is involved it is also 
painful. This condition cannot be healed with herbs. 
Detoxifying herbs are used after surgery for 
prevention of further growths (see Chapter 22). 

Malignant Growth (shataghni) is a swelling 
studded with muscle-sprout spikes, causing different 


kin ds of pain and is life-threatening. This condition 
cannot be healed with herbs. Detoxifying herbs are 
used after surgery for prevention of further growths 
(see Chapter 22). 

Tonsillitis (galayu) See the Metabolic System— 
Chapter (25). 

Pharyngeal abscess (gala vidradhi) is caused by 
all three doshas and is associated with swelling and 
different ki nds of pains. 





Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 19: Ear, Nose, Throat, (Eyes, Mouth) 


Sense Organs : 



internal and middle ear 


external ear 


middle ear 


internal ear 



lateral semicircular canal 
L asterior semicircular canal 
superior semicircular canal 
vestibular nerve 
facial nerve 
cochlear nerve 


eustachian tube 


auditory ossicles 


external auditory meatus 


Sense Organs: Smell 

External Nose 



Root of Nose 
Dorsum of Nose- 
Tip of Nose 
Ala 
Naris 

Mobile Septum of Nose- 
Philtrum 


Frontal Sinus 
Nasal Bone 


Greater Alar Cartilage- 


Maxilla 




Nasal Fossa 

Cribriform Plate of Ethmoid 
Superior Nasal Concha 
Middle Nasal Concha 
Interior Nasal Concha 
Spheniodal Sinus 

Eustachian Tube 


Nasapharynx 
Uvula 
Palate 
Septal Cartilege of Nose 

































The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 




Wo^onxaai 57 U-ilLIlA. 












Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 20: Nervous System 


Persons whose Vayu is in balance live 100 years without disease. 

Madhava Nidanam - Ch. 22; ver. 80 


Chapter 20 

Nervous System (Vata-vyadhi) 

Convulsions, Sciatica, Insanity, Epilepsy, Addictions, Alcohol, Fainting, 
Coma, Wasting, Multiple Sclerosis, Parkinsons, Alzheimer’s 


f s Vayu is the sustainer of life, those whose Vayu 
flows properly will live a long and healthy life. 
The five forms of Vayu governing the various 
physical and mental movement of air have been pre¬ 
viously discussed. They are repeated here, to show 
how the Vayu sub -doshas can afflict the nervous sys¬ 
tem 


Vayu 

Location 

Controls 

Prana 

head, chest, 
throat, tongue, 
mouth, nose 

digestion, 
breathing, 
belching, 
sneezing 
spitting, heart 
function 

Udcina 

navel, chest, 
throat 

speech, effort, 
energy, 
complexion, 
aspiration, 
memory 

Samdna 

sweat, doshas , 
fluid, small 
intestine 

digestion 

Vyana 

entire body 

circulation, 
muscle and 
joint 

movement, 

blinking, 

secretions 

Apdna 

colon, genitals, 
urinary bladder, 
navel, thighs, 

anus 

semen, urine, 
stool, menses, 
fetus 


If any of the Vayus is imbalanced, or moves to the 
wrong channel, the body becomes afflicted with vari¬ 
ous disorders that can be life-threatening. 

Cause: Vayu is the vital nerve-force that pervades 
the entire body. It is considered identical to Divine 
eternal energy and is, therefore, self-generating. Vayu 
is at the root of all nervous disorders. Causes include 
cold, roughness, lightness, little or no food, excessive 
sex, talking or staying up late; or excessive release of 
toxins and blood. Other causes are leaping, jumping, 
traveling, or exercise in excess, wasting of the tissues, 
excessive emaciation from anxiety, grief, fear, or 
il lness. Further causes are uncomfortable beds and 
chairs, anger, naps, fear, suppressing natural urges, 
dma (toxins), injury, fasting, injuring vital organs, or 
accidents. Vayu becomes excessed, filling the body 
channels, causing disorders associated with those 
body parts. 

As tissues become depleted, Vayu fills the chan¬ 
nels with air, or become mixed with the other doshas 
that have fi ll ed the channels. A second way Vayu 
becomes excessed is by increasing the functioning 
of the channels. When Vayu is the only cause of vi¬ 
tiation, the result is more severe; when it is mixed 
with Pitta or Kapha, it is not as powerful. 

Development: Vayu accumulates in its home site, the 
colon, causing colic, gas, gurgling, feces obstruction, 
urinary stones, herniated scrotum, hemorrhoids, sharp 
pain the back and waist, and other difficult diseases 
related to the lower body parts. 

tr 




















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Symptoms: Excess Vayu causes contraction, stiff 
joints, hands, back, or head; tearing of bones or joints, 
hair standing on end, delirium, limping, crippling, 
humpback, organ dryness, and insomnia. It also 
causes organ numbness, crookedness of the head, 
nose, eyes, neck, and clavicular area; miscarriage, 
destruction of sperm or ovum, pulsation, tearing or 
piercing pain, distress, convulsions, confusion, and 
exhaustion. 

When Vayu becomes aggravated 
In the Whole Body (Sarvanm): Symptoms include 
tremors, twitching, pulsating, cutting pain, joint pain 
In the Abdomen!Alimentary Tract/Bowels (Koshtha- 

shrita): Symptoms include obstmction to the passage 
of urine and feces; abdominal tumor, heart disease, 
hemorrhoids, and rib pain. 

In Rectum (Gudashrita): Urine, stool, and gas 
retention; colic, urinary stones or gravel, abdominal 
distention, pain and emaciation in legs, calves, thighs, 
pelvis, sacrum, feet, and back can develop. 

In Stomach and Small Intestine (Amashaya): Person’s 
experience pain in the heart, navel, ribs, and abdomen; 
thirst, belching, cough, dry throat and mouth, difficult 
breathing, vomiting, vertigo, and epilepsy. 

In Colon (Pakvdshaya): Experiences include 
intestinal gurgling, colic, meteorism, difficulty 
passing stool and urine, bowel hardness, piercing pain 
in the navel area and sharp pain in waist and back. 
Other experiences include hemorrhoids, cough, 
indigestion with vomiting and diarrhea 
simultaneously; herniated scrotum, thirst, vomiting, 
and difficult breathing. Further symptoms include 
throat obstruction, scanty and painful urination and 
stool (or complete stoppage); excess belching, coccyx, 
pain and diseases related to the body above the navel. 
In Sense Organs (Indriyagata): Loss of sensation 
(e.g., ears, eyes) 

In Skin (Twak): Symptoms include rough, cracked, 
numb, and thin skin; redness, joint pain, dryness, 
discoloration, and twitching. This leads to tingling 
and piercing s ki n pain, with cracks and fissures. 

In Blood (Raktagata): Persons experience severe pain 
and heat, poor complexion, thinness, anorexia, body 
pimples, indigestion, loss of sensation, redness, 
ulceration, loss of appetite, emaciation, and dizziness. 
In Muscles (Mamsagata): Symptoms include nodes 
and tumors with severe pain and hardness, exertion, 


heaviness, and rigidity. 

In Fat (Medogata): Persons develop painless tumors 
with ulcers. 

In Marrow (Maiiagatci): Symptoms include 
of bones, causing constant pain throughout the body 
and insomnia. 

In Bones (Asthigata): Experiences include thigh, 
bone, and joint breaking pain; loss of strength, 
wasting, cracking, and bursting. 

In Semen/Ovum (Shukragata): One experiences 
premature ejaculation or retention of semen and fetus 
(including abnormal fetus). 

In Tendons: Symptoms include sciatica, tetanus, and 
hunch back. 

In Ligaments (Snayu): Cramps, humpbacked, neck, 
torso, and back problems (opisthotonus, 
emprosthotonus) are symptoms of this disorder. 

In Veins/Arteries - Blood vessels (Siragata): Persons 
experience mild pain, dry swellings, emptiness, 
tremors, stiffness or constriction, and neuralgia. 

In Joints (Sandhigata): One experiences air-filled 
swellings and pain when moving limbs. 


Convulsions (Akshe-paka) 

Vayu excesses cause convulsions, drying of hands, 
feet, blood vessels, ligaments, tendons, and hips. 
Symptoms include frequent jerky movements of the 
body. This disease cannot be healed if it lasts longer 
than one year. All convulsive disorders are 
experienced intermittently. 

In Half the Body: When excess Vayu is in one half of 
the body, it dries up the blood, hands, legs, and knees. 


























Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 20: Nervous System 


The limbs and tissues are also contracted. This results 
in the face, nose, eyebrows, forehead, eyes, and jaw 
becoming crooked. The tongue is raised; the voice is 
hoarse, weak, and speech is hindered. It causes loose 
teeth, impaired hearing, pains in the foot, eye, leg, 
temple, ear, and cheek. These symptoms occur in 
either half of the body or the face (facial paralysis). 
Throughout Body: The lower body is first affected, 
then, the upper extremities and head, or the whole 
body are affected; deranging all the tissues. Persons 
experience numbness or paralysis, limb convulsions 
and contractions, pricking, splitting, throbbing, cutting 
pain, stiffness, convulsions, tremors, and swelling. 

In the Neck Carotid Arteries/Nerves - Stiff Neck 

(Manvasthambha ): Vayu can become excessed alone 
or with Kapha from day naps, irregular posture or 
looking in an upward direction for a long time. 

— Ahtardydma: Stiffarteries/nerves at the side of the 
neck (manya dhamanis). Experiences include neck 
bending inwards, stiff carotid arteries throughout the 
body; shoulder constriction, grinding of teeth, 
salivation, the back bending inward l ik e a bow, stiff 
head, yawning, and lockjaw. It also causes 
convulsions, loss of eye movement, vomiting of 
mucus, rib pain, and difficulty speaking. 

In the Back - Opisthotonos (Vahirdydma): When 
excess Vayu dries up the external vessels of the back 
and carotid arteries, it causes back stiffness that results 
in one bending outward or downward. The head leans 
backwards. The chest is pushed upwards. Carotid 
arteries are stiff, and the neck is bent downward. There 
is grinding teeth, discoloration of teeth and mouth, 
yawning, salivation, loss of speech, excess sweating, 
physical debility, restlessness. It may be life- 
threatening. 

Convulsions and Unconsciousness (Apatan-traka): 
When aggravated Vayu becomes obstructed in its 
downward movement, it starts moving upwards, 
causing pain in the heart, head, and temples, making 
the body bend like a bow. One experiences 
convulsions and loss of consciousness. Other 
symptoms include difficult breathing, wide-eyed 
(without blinking) or eyes completely closed, and 
cooing sounds. Causes include abortion, heavy 
bleeding, and trauma. Healing is difficult. Long-term 
conditions cannot be healed. 


Convulsions and Consciousness (Apatdnaka): This 

is a similar condition to apatantraka. Symptoms in¬ 
clude eyes having a fixed gaze, unconsciousness, 
cooing, intermittent relief. Healing is difficult. Long¬ 
term conditions cannot be healed. 

Vdyu/Kapha Body Paralysis (Dandaka): When 
excess Vayu further develops an excess of Kapha, 
both doshas overflow into all the body’s channels, 
fil led with undigested food toxins (dma), it makes 
the body stiff (like a wood log) with paralysis. A major 
symptom is jaw bone paralysis. Healing is very 
difficult, if not impossible. 

Tetanus (Dhanustambha): Excessed Vayu causes the 
body to bend in a bow shape. 

— Inner-Bending Bow (Abhyanthrdydma); When the 
excessed Vayu affects the nerves and tendons located 
in the toes, heels, abdomen, heart area, chest, and 
throat, it causes severe convulsive movements. Other 
symptoms include fixed gaze, stiff lower jaw, with¬ 
drawn ribs, vomiting mucus, and the body bending 
inwards. 

— Outer-Bending Bow (Bdhydydma); When Vayu 
affects the tendons and nerves of the external body 
parts, persons develop outward bending (of the front 
portion of the body), degeneration (dystrophy) of the 
chest, waist, and thighs. This cannot be healed. 
Trauma/Hemorrhage (Vrandydma): When the 
doshas become aggravated in wounds on vital organs 
by Vayu, they spread throughout the body and 
produce convulsions. Symptoms include thirst and a 
yellowish-white complexion. This is a very serious 
condition. Any or all of the doshas can become 
excessed. 

Convulsions caused by abortion, trauma, or ex¬ 
cessive bleeding cannot be healed. 

Tongue Difficulties (Jihvd-sthambha): When Vayu 
is caught in the tendons, nerves, and veins, near the 
vocal cords, it causes paralysis of the tongue with 
consequent inability to swallow and speak. 




















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Lock-Jaw (Hanusramsa): Loose jaw or lockjaw. 
Owing to excess tongue scraping, eating dry foods 
and trauma, Vayu becomes localized and excessed 
at the lower jaw. This displaces the lower jaw, making 
it stay open or closed, causes chewing and speaking 
difficulties. Healing is difficult. Long-term conditions 
are incurable. 

Facial Paralysis <Ardita >: Vayu becomes excessed 
and localized in the upper body from carrying heavy 
loads on the head, excess laughing, speaking, facial 
exertion (e.g., mimicking), sneezing, physical strain, 
sleeping on uneven or hard pillows, and chewing very 
hard foods. Symptoms include irregularities in half 
of the face (especially during laughing and with sight). 
The head begins to shake. Premonitory symptoms 
include speech obstructions, loss of eye movement, 
tremors, teeth shaking, hoarseness, deafness, blocked 
sneezing, loss of smell and memory, delusions, 
exhaustion during sleep, saliva coming out of the 
mouth during sleep, one eye becomes closed, severe 
pain above the shoulders, half of the body, or in lower 
body. When this disorder exists in emaciated persons 
for over 3 years, who can not wink and slur their 
speech, it is incurable. 

In Blood and Veins (Siragraha): Vayu becomes 
excessed in the blood and veins of the head, causing 
them to shrink, become hard, painful, and black. This 
disorder is difficult to heal or may not be healed. 
Hemiplegia - Half of the Body Veins and Tendons 

(Pakshavadha or Ekahgaroga): Vayu becomes 
excessed in half of the body, drying the veins and 
tendons by loosening the joints. The result is the loss 
of function and tactile sensation. — Whole Body 
Paralysis (Sarvahgaroga): As above, when Vayu 
affects the entire body, the disorder is difficult to heal. 
The involvement of excess Pitta and Kapha render 
this condition incurable. 

Pitta symptoms include burning sensation, 
increased temperature of the affected body parts, and 
fainting. Kapha symptoms include cold, swelling and 
heaviness of the affected body parts. 

Pakshavadha caused by Vayu is difficult to heal. 
When it is caused by Vayu and other doshas, it is 
easy to heal. Symptoms of emaciation or wasting 
cannot be healed. When Pakshavadha is found in 
pregnant women, women who have just given birth, 
the elderly, emaciated person, caused by excessive 


bleeding, or experiencing no sensation at all in the 
affected limb, treatment should not be attempted. 
Shoulder Caused Ann Paralysis (Apabd-huka): Vayu 
situated at the shoulder’s roots constrict the tendons, 
nerves, and veins, and cause emaciation of the local 
muscles. Loss of arm movement develops. 

Hand Caused Ann Paralysis (Vishva-chl): Tendon 
constriction in the palms and fingers and back of the 
arm, leads to loss of arm functioning. 

Leg Paralysis (Khahia/Pahgu): Vavu localized in the 
thighs and waist constricts these tendons causing 
lameness to either one (khahga ) or both (pahgu ) legs. 
Leg Obstructions (Kald-vakhahja): Symptoms 
include trembling legs and pain when beginning to 
walk, as well as limping and loose joints. This is 
caused by eating peas or lentils. 

Stiff Thighs (Uru-sthambha): Excesses of Vayu, 
Kapha, fat, and undigested food toxins are caused by 
overeating cold, hot, moist, dry, heavy, fatty, cooked 
or raw foods, overexertion, debility, not sleeping, or 
oversleeping. This results in the accumulation of 
doshas and toxins in the thighs, filling the interior of 
the thigh bone with Kapha. The thigh becomes stiff 
and inactive, cold, senseless, heavy, and with severe 
pain. Symptoms include, excessive belching, worry, 
body aches, inactivity, stupor, vomiting, loss of 
appetite and taste, fever, weakness in the feet, 
difficulty lifting, and loss of the sense of touch. 
Knee Swelling (Kroshtuka Shlrsha): Vayu and blood 
becoming excessed, produces a swelling in the middle 
of the knee that is very painful and large. 

Ankle Pain (Vdta-kantaka): Vavu accumulates in the 
ankle joint or heel owing to walking improperly or 
by overexertion, causing severe heel or ankle pain. 



















Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 20: Nervous System 


Finger/Toe Contraction (Khalli): The legs, thighs, 
calves, chest, and arm contraction and pain. 

Foot Sleeping (Pada-harsha): Experiences include 
tingling sensations in the feet (i.e., loss of tactile 
sensations or it feels like pins and needles.) This is 
caused by Kapha and Vayu. 

Burning Soles (Pada-daha): Vayu, Pitta, and blood 
cause burning sensations in the soles of one involved 
in excess walking. 

Nasal/Stammering (Minminatwa/Gadgadatwa): 

Excess Vayu and Kapha invade the vessels of the 
voice box, causing muteness, talking through the nose, 
or stammering. 

Cutting Pain in Rectum. Bladder. Groin (Turn): When 
excess Vayu moves in a downward direction, severe 
cutting pain is experienced in these areas. 

Cutting Colon Pain (Pratituni): When excess Vayu 
moves in an upward direction, the pain is felt in the 
colon. 

Lower Abdominal Distention (Adhmana): Excess 
Vayu causes obstmcted gas that develops intestinal 
gurgling, severe pain, and distention of the lower 
abdomen. 

Upper Abdominal Distention (Pratadlvnana): When 
excess Vayu and Kapha are involved the above 
symptoms are felt in the stomach (but not in the heart 
or rib area). 

Prostate Tumor/No Pain (Ashtila): A tumor obstructs 
the passage of feces and urine. Also see Chapter 18. 
Prostate Tumor/Pain (Pratyashtila): A tumor 
obstructs the passage of gas, feces, and urine, and 
causes pain. Also see Chapter 18. 

Tremors (Vepathu >: Vayu excesses throughout the 
body cause tremors (including tremors of the head). 

Should any of these diseases not subside within 
5 years, they cannot be healed. 



Sciatica (GridhrasI) 

Excesses of Vayu either alone or with Kapha cause 
difficulty and severe pain in the lumbar region down 
through the thighs, knees, calves, and feet. Vayu 
causes rigidity, throbbing, pricking pain, intermittent 
symptoms, irregular shape of body parts, and severe 
stiffness of the knee and waist. Kapha symptoms 
include stupor, heaviness, poor digestion, salivation, 
and aversion to food. 

Dual Doshas 

When Vayu enters the origin sites of Pitta and 
Kapha (small intestine or stomach), mixed symptoms 
occur. 

Vdyu/Pitta: Burning, heat, thirst, fainting, and other 
Vayu diseases related to that part of the body can 
develop. 

Vdyu/Kapha: Symptoms include coldness, swelling, 
heaviness in the associated area of the body. 
Vayu/Blood: Pricking pain that is unbearable to touch, 
or numbness, and other Pitta symptoms occur. 
Prana Vdyu/Pitta: Vomiting, burning, and other Pitta 
symptoms develop. 

Prana Vdyu/Kapha: Symptoms include weakness, 
lassitude, skin discoloration, loss of taste, and appetite. 
Udcma Vdyu/Pitta: Burning, fainting, epileptic fit, 
giddiness, vertigo, or fatigues develops. 

Uddna Vdyu/Kapha: Symptoms include lack of 
perspiration, goose bumps, poor digestion, coldness, 
and numbness in the related body parts. 

Samdna Vdyu/Pitta: Excess perspiration, heat, 
burning, or epilepsy develops. 

Samdna Vdyu/Kapha: Experiences include excess 
mucus, urine and feces, hair standing on end. 

Apdna Vdyu/Pitta: Heat, burning, and menorrhagia 
can develop. 

Apdna Vdyu/Kapha: Heaviness of lower limbs can 
occur. 

Vydna Vdyu/Pitta: Symptoms include limbs burning 
and jerking, and fatigue. 

Vydna Vdyu/Kapha: Persons can develop heaviness 
of limbs, stiff or numb bone joints, and can find it 
difficult to move or walk. 
































The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Vertigo: This may be caused by constipation or toxic 
liver. Vayu presses bile into the heart and the heart 
presses air into the head. Thus, it is a disease of Vayu 
and Pitta. 

Vayu—loss of hearing, suffocating, dry nose, and 
tongue. Brahmi (gotu kola) is helpful. 

Pitta—burning eyes. Brahmi, shafikhpushpl, and 
shatavari are useful. 

Other therapies: Shiro basti and urd dal for brain and 
semen building/balancing are advised. Shad bindu 
oil is used in thp nose. 

Hemispheres 
of the brain 


Vdyu/Bone: One desires hot compresses and mas¬ 
sage and experiences breaking and piercing pain, sick¬ 
liness. 

Vdvu/Marrow: Bending, yawning, cramps, and 
pains (eased when pressed) develop. 

Vdyu/Semen-Ovum: Semen is either excessive or 
not emitted; sterility occurs. 

Vayu/Food: One experiences abdominal pain 
when eating; pain disappears when stomach is empty. 

Vdyu/Urine: Urinary retention, bladder bursting. 



Space 

(Vayu) 


(Menengoleyan 

Layer 

Outer Mengel 
Secretion - Pitta) 


Vayu causes excesses of Pitta and Kapha and re¬ 
sult in dual dosha disorders. 

Vdyu/Pitta: Symptoms include burning, thirst, 
pain, giddiness, darkness, desire for cold things; burn¬ 
ing is exacerbated by eating and drinking hot, pun¬ 
gent, sour, and salty things. 

Vdyu/Blood: Persons experience burning, distress, 
and the area between the skin and muscles become 
red, swollen, and rashes develop. 

Vdyn/Kapha: The above symptoms are experi¬ 
enced along with drowsiness, heaviness, and anor¬ 
exia. 

Vdyu/Muscle: Symptoms include hard, discolored 
boils, swelling, hair standing on end, a feeling like 
ants are crawling on the body. 

Vdyu/Fat: Persons experience anorexia, shifting, 
oiliness, softness and cold swellings of body parts. 
This is difficult to heal. 


Vdyn/Stool: Symptoms include constipation, anal/ 
rectal cutting pain. Oily items are quickly digested; 
hard bowels occur after meals; pain occurs in hip, 
groin, and back; Vayu moves backwards; the heart 
becomes weak. 

Therapies: Certain symptoms can be healed if they 
have recently developed or if persons are strong. 
Symptoms include joint displacement, lockjaw, 
contraction, humped-back, paralysis of one or both 
sides of the body; wasting of limbs, marrow and bone 
disorders, sti ff ness. Depending upon how deeply they 
are located will determine how easy or difficult they 
are to heal. When Vayu is excessed without Pitta or 
Kapha and is easily reached, ghee and oil (internally 
and externally) soothe the nervous system. Unction 
quickly nourishes the dried body tissues, promoting 
strength, digestion, weight gain, and vital breath. 
Unction is given until one feels they have had enough, 
then some time is allowed to pass without taking 
unction. Unction is again taken, this time, with boiled 
milk, vegetable soup, rice, and milk (cooked with 
dmalakl and black salt), oil enema, snuff, and moist 
foods. When persons are well-saturated, they then 
begin fomentation. After massage, oil fomentation is 
taken. These measures are said to make even crooked 
or stiff limbs pliable again. This has been seen to occur 
in persons afflicted with Par ki nsonism. Piercing pain, 
distress, dilation, swelling, seizures, hair standing on 
end, and other nerve-caused disorders (e.g., worry- 
caused dysuria) are quickly pacified. Unction and 
sudation are frequently administered. Once bowels 
are softened from unction, Vayu disorders are quickly 
resolved. 

Impurities develop from undigested fatty, sour, 






















Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 20: Nervous System 


salty, and hot foods, that block Vayu in the channels. 
If excess impurity exists and the disorder is not healed 
by the above therapies, persons should take mild, oil 
purgatives (e.g., castor oil) to assist the evacuation 
process. Warm carminative herbs, such as cardamom, 
ginger, cinnamon, cloves, and turmeric, help dispel 
gas, improve digestion, and assist absorption of un¬ 
digested foods that cause impurities. Weak persons 
use non-oil enemas and digestive herbs, and foods 
instead of purgatives. 

General: Therapies include ghee, sesame oil, Vayu- 
reducing foods and lifestyle, aromatherapy using 
sandalwood oil on the forehead, hot-oil head 
massages (shim dhara/shiro basti); gotu kola oil (3 
drops) in the nose, then gently massaged; baths and 
sprinklings (on the afflicted body part and after 
massage) with decoctions of the herbs listed below. 
Poultices made from the herbs and foods listed below, 
may be wrapped around the affected body part. 
Herbs: Vamsha lochana, guggul, hantaki, brahml, 
gokshura, ashwagandha, bibhltakl, bhrihgardj, bald, 
cedar, dashmul, trikatu, and brahml ghee are useful. 
Foods: Almonds (soaked overnight and peel the skin), 
sesame tahini, ghee, sesame oil, boiled milk, black 
dal, whole wheat, and barley are suggested. Yogurt/ 
water (lassi) mixed with trikatu is also useful in 
soothing nerves. 

In Belly: Suggestions include dmalakl and triphald 
(sours and laxatives) mixed with carminative herbs 
to reduce malnutrition. 

In Anus, Rectum and Colon: Herbs to reverse excess 
upward moving air are used. This includes hihg, 
ajwan, black salt, chitrak, ginger, and black pepper. 
A castor oil purgative and basti are advised. 

In Stomach: If strong, emesis is first done. Vayu- 
reducing herbs and foods are used. Chitrak and katukd 
are also advised. 

Throughout Body: Massage, and non-oil and oil 
enemas are used. 

In Skin: Sudation, massage, bath, and delicious foods 
reduce Vayu in the s ki n. 

In Blood: Cold applications, purgation, and blood¬ 
letting are useful. 

In Muscle and Fat (or with Ama): Fomentation, 
abhyahga, poultice, non-oil enema, milk, ghee, and 


pacifying therapies are used. 

In Bone and Marrow: Internal and external unction 
are needed. Bones may need to be bound. 

In Semen/Ovum: Foods and herbs to promote semen 
(e.g., almonds, tahini, boiled milk, shatdvarl, 
ashwagandha) are required. However, if blocks in 
the seminal passage occur, purgatives are first used 
to remove the obstruction. Sitting in baths or sprinkled 
with water— both include Vayu-reducing herbs—is 
advised. 

For Dry Fetus Or Child: Boiled milk with cane sugar 
are suggested. 

In Urine/Bladder: Diuretics like gokshura and 
steamed vegetables are helpful; urethral douche, 
oiling the body, poultices with Vayu-reducing herbs, 
abhyahga, plasters, and fomentation are advised. 

In Stool: Castor oil purgative, foods, and herbs to 
reduce Vayu are used. 

In Heart: Boiled milk with arjuna, chitrak, pippall, 
triphald, and black salt. 

In Navel Area: Bilwa, chitrak, and ajamoda are 
advised. 

For Twisting: Poultices with Vayu-reducing herbs are 
pressed on the twisted body parts. 

For Contractions: Sesame oil cooked with black dal, 
sesame oil, and rock salt are massaged into the 
disorder. 

In Anns and Head: Snuff and ingesting ghee after 
meals is helpful. 

Below the Navel: Juice enemas and snuff alleviate 
these conditions. Herbs include ginger and nirgundl 
decoctions. 

For Facial Paralysis: Snuff, head oil massage (shim 
dhara/shiro basti —around 16 minutes), tube 
fomentation and poultices with ghee, ashwagandha, 
ginger, trikatu, nirgundl, guggul, kutki, kut, and 
brahml are used. 

For Paralysis of One Side: Sudation, unction, and 
purgation are recommended. 

For Cramps: Hot poultices of boiled rice-milk, or 
cooked rice-bean, with oil or ghee are advised. 

For Sciatica: Hatha yoga leg and back stretches (see 
Chapter 9), and herbs of pippall, gokshura, and bald 
are taken. 

For Lock-Jaw: 

Open mouth —foment the jaw, then press jaw with 































The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


thumbs and lift the chin up to close the mouth. 

Displaced—adjust to proper placement. 

Stiffness—foment, then bend. 

Vdyu/Pitta: Cold and hot measures are alternately 
applied; purgation, and licorice are added to the 
general therapies listed above. 

Vdyu/Kapha: Barley, sudation, strong, dry enemas, 
puigation, and mustard oil are used along with Kapha- 
reducing therapies listed above. When this excess is 
in the head, snuff and herbal smoking is advised. 
Tridoshic: Pitta is pacified before Kapha. When Pitta 
spreads over the entire body, purgation is used. When 
Kapha moves to the stomach, emesis is advised. 
Enemas are used after Kapha becomes liquefied 
through fomentation, and once Pitta symptoms 
appear. When Pitta and Kapha are removed, yet Vayu 
remains in the respiratory channels, the above Vayu- 
reducing therapies are used. 

Afflictions of the Five Vayus 

Each of the five Vayus may afflict the other four, 
creating 20 different symptoms. 

For heart diseases and painful stomach: Ghee with 
chitrak, trikatu, triphald, and king are beneficial. 
Pran covers Vyana: Symptoms include vacant senses, 
weakened intellect, memory, and strength; 
senselessness, and loss of speaking. Bala oil and 
amridadya arc used. 

Vyana covers Pran: Symptoms include excess 
sweating, skin diseases, numb body parts, hair 
standing on end. Castor oil purgatives are advised. 
Sanidna covers Pran: Symptoms include abdominal 

pain, digestive disorder (graham), rib, heart, and 
stomach pain disorders. Ghee with appetizing herbs 
(e.g., cardamom and cinnamon) are suggested. 

Pran covers Sanidna: Persons experience feeling 
stunned, stammering, and dumbness. Unction is used 
internally for massage and in snuff; and enemas are 
recommended. When acute headaches, respiratory 
problems, heart disease, and a dry mouth develop, 
smoking herb and consoling the patient are advised. 
Pran covers Uddna: Symptoms include a stiff head, 
cold, and mucus, difficult breathing, heart disorders, 
dry mouth, sweating, s ki n diseases, and the organs 


seem dead. For these conditions, therapies include oily 
laxatives (e.g., ghee or castor oil). 

Uddna covers Pran: One experiences a loss of 
immunity, strength, activity, complexion; this may 
be life threatening. Sprinkling with cold water, 
consolation, and giving all comforts desired are the 
therapies used. 

Pran covers Apdn: Experiences include vomiting and 
difficult breathing. Enemas with raspberry; 
carminative herbs with harltaki for vomiting and 
breathing, respectively, are advised. 

Apdn covers Pran: Symptoms include confusion, 
weakened digestion, diarrhea. Emesis and appetizing 
and astringent foods and herbs are best. 

Vydin covers Apdna: Persons experience vomiting, 
abdominal distention, tumors, distress, cutting pain. 
Unction is the best remedy. 

Apdn covers Vyana: Experiences include excessive 
stool, urine, and semen. Astringent herbs and foods 
are required. 

Sanidna covers Vyana: Symptoms include fainting 
drowsiness, delirium, illness, poor digestion, 
immunity, and strength. Physical exercise and light 
foods are needed. 

Uddna covers Vyana: Experiences include stiffness, 
poor digestion, no sweating, less activity, inability to 
keep the eyes opened. Wholesome, moderate-sized, 
light meals are most useful. 

In the “Chikitsd-sthdnam” section of Charak 
Samhitd, these 12 combinations are listed to illus¬ 
trate how the five Vayus combine and what therapies 
are used. Based on this, Charak suggests one care¬ 
fully consider the symptoms and therapy for the re¬ 
maining combinations. One needs to remember is that 
Pran should be carefully protected owing to its deli¬ 
cate location. Uddna is led upwards, apdn down¬ 
wards, sanidna in the middle, and, vyana in all direc¬ 
tions. 

Pitta covers Pran: Symptoms include fasting, burn¬ 
ing in the body parts or organs, giddiness, pain, de¬ 
siring cold things, and vomiting partially digested 
foods. 

Kapha covers Pran: Symptoms include spitting, 
sneezing, belching, respiratory problems, anorexia, 
and vomiting. 





























Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 20: Nervous System 


Pitta covers Uclana: Experiences are, fainting, 
burning in the navel and chest areas, exhaustion, 
depletion of ojas, sic kl iness. 

Kapha covers Uclana: Symptoms include a poor 
complexion, speech problems, debility, heaviness, 
anorexia. 

Pitta covers Samdna: Experiences include excess 
sweating, thirst, burning, fainting, restless, and heat 
disorders. 

Kapha covers Samdna: Lack of sweat, poor digestion, 
hair standing on end, and very cold body limbs can 
develop. 

Pitta covers Vycina: Burning throughout the body, 
exhaustion, restricted movements, pyrexia, and pain 
can occur. 

Kapha covers Vycina: Symptoms include heaviness, 
joint and bone pain; movement is greatly restricted. 
Pitta covers Apan: Experiences include deep yellow 
urine and stool; heat in the anus and genitals; excess 
menstrual discharge. 

Kapha covers Apan: Persons experience stools passed 
in pieces with dma, mucus, and heaviness. 

Kapha covering Pran and Uclana are serious 
conditions, as life depends upon Pran, and strength 
relies on Udana. If improperly analyzed and the 
situation continues unchecked beyond a year, or if 
improper therapies are used, it will not be curable. 

The results of neglect are heart disorders, 
abscesses, enlarged spleen, tumors, diarrhea. If all 
five Vayus are excessed, carminatives are 
immediately used with oils (that cleanse the channels 
rather than block them), yet do not aggravate Pitta 
and Kapha. Thus one takes sweet, rejuvenative 
enemas, and oil enemas until strength returns. Then, 
mild purgatives are given. The best rejuvenatives are 
shildjit or guggul with boiled milk. Other herbs 
include dmalaki and luintakl, taken with a wholesome 
or sattwic diet. 

Apan covers other Vayus: The only remedy is eating 
appetizing, astringent and carminative herbs and foods 
that cleanse the bowels and dispel gas. 

Pitta covers Vayus: Herbs and foods that reduce both 
Pitta and Vayu are used. 

Kapha covers Vayus: Kapha-reducing and carmina¬ 
tive herbs are used. 


Insanity (Unmada) 

Causes: Charak defines insanity as, “the perversion 
of the mind, intellect, consciousness, knowledge, 
memory, desire, manners, behavior, and conduct.” 
Five types of insanity exist: Vayu, Pitta, Kapha, 
Tridosha, and externally caused insanity. It is the main 
disease of Vayu dosha. The main causes of insanity, 
as we will see, result from personal misdeeds. When 
any of the three doshas cause insanity, symptoms 
quickly develop in persons with certain conditions. 
These characteristics include timidness, an agitated 
(rajasic) or lethargic (tamas) mind, or an imbalance 
in the physical doshas. Other conditions include 
following an unwholesome diet or lifestyle, when 
other health concerns are present, or if the mind is 
constantly afflicted by emotions (e.g., fear, anger, 
greed). Further characteristics include physical 
assault, trauma, or injury. From these situations the 
mind becomes greatly imbalanced. 

Vayu: Caused by fasting or an excessive intake of 
dry or cold foods. This affects the heart and mind 
with worry, passion, and anger; which results in 
distortion of memory and perceptions. 

Pitta : Resulting from indigestion, excess of hot, 
pungent, sour, or burning foods and liquids, excessed 
Pitta afflicts the heart of a person lacking self-control. 
Kapha: This is caused by overeating and an excessive 
use of oily foods. This aggravated Kapha afflicts the 
heart, troubling the mind and memory. 
























The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Triclosha: Caused by the excessed condition of all 
three doshas. It is considered serious because the 
therapies will aggravate one or more of the doshas. 
Therefore, this condition is incurable. 

External: This results from a lack of following ethics 
and virtues in this life, or in past lives, causing 
problems by the dogs, sages, demons. 

Development: The above causes weaken the doshas 
that afflict the (mind’s) heart when there is less sattwa 
(purity) in one’s life and mind. The disease develops 
through the mdnovaha srota (mental channels) that 
sends psychic energy to the mind. 

Premonitory Signs: Empty feeling in head, congested 
eyes, ear noises, excessive heavy breathing, excessive 
salivation, no desire to eat, anorexia and indigestion, 
cardiac spasms, fatigue, fainting, and anxiety at the 
wrong time and place. Other signs include hair 
standing on end continuously, frequent and quickly 
rising fevers in children that produces convulsions, 
fickle minded-ness, upper body pains, facial paralysis 
on one half of the face, frequent dreams relating to 
(1) inauspicious objects that are wandering, moving, 
or unstable; (2) the two hemispheres of the brain; (3) 
being churned by whirlwinds; and (4) retraction of 
the eyes. Unlike other diseases, insanity develops 
immediately after premonitory symptoms. This 
includes a variety of mental problems, such as 
schizophrenia and manic-depression. 

Symptoms: 

General symptoms include, impatience, fickleness, 
unsteady vision, a sensation of a vacuum in the heart, 
loss of peace, memory, and intellect. 

Vdyu: Constantly wandering, spasms of the eyes, 
eyebrows, lips, shoulders, jaws, forearms, legs; con¬ 
stant incoherent speech, frothing of the mouth, al¬ 
ways smiling, laughing, dancing, singing, and play¬ 
ing with musical instruments at the wrong time or 
place. Other symptoms include loudly imitating a 
flute, conch, or cymbals; riding in dangerous vehicles, 
desiring excessive jewelry and ornaments, longing 
for foods that cannot be obtained; emaciation and 
rough, reddish skin; reddish, projected eyes; shock, 
depression, symptoms worsen by continuing to fol¬ 


low Vayu-increasing life-styles and foods. 

Pitta : Irritation and anger, excitement at the wrong 
time, place, or for the wrong reasons; causing injury 
to others; fleeing; need for shade, cold water, and 
cooling foods; overly daring, intimidating; constant 
anguish, anger, impatience, passion, intolerance; go¬ 
ing naked; yellow complexion; ferocious eyes that 
are coppery, green, or yellow. Symptoms worsen by 
continuing to follow Pitta-increasing life-styles and 
foods. 

Kapha: (with Pitta) Staying in one place and 
observing silence; sluggishness in speech and activity, 
occasional movement, discharging saliva and nasal 
excretions, lack of hunger and longing for solitude, 
excessive sexual desire, frightening appearance, 
aversion to cleanliness, anorexia, depression, greed, 
always sleepy, whitish nails, facial edema, eyes are 
white, timid and contain excreta. Symptoms worsen 
by continuing to follow Kapha-increasing life-styles 
and foods. 

Tridosha: The combined imbalance of all three 
doshas causes symptoms of all three doshas. This 
form of insanity is incurable. 

Therapies: Oleation, fomentation, emesis, purgation, 
medicated and cleansing enemas, detoxification, 
fumigation (burning jatdmdnshi and inhaling the 
smoke), eye wash, aromatherapy, eye salves, 
medicated snuffs (brdhrni nasya), massage, 
sprinkling, unction, tying, confinement, frightening, 
inducing astonishment and forgetfulness, depletion, 
surgery, appropriate dosha foods and life-styles. 
Vdyu: First, oil and ghee therapies (sneha) are used, 
if the air passages are not blocked. If they are blocked, 
laxatives are given with the oils and ghee to remove 
the blocks. 

Pitta or Kapha: First, oleation and fomentation 
therapies are used, then purgatives, followed by 
emetics, are given. After that, one begins to eat from 
thinner and lighter, to thicker and heavier foods 
(according to post pahcha karma food regimes— 
Chapter 7). Lastly, medicated enemas with oil ox ghee 
are given, along with dosha evacuation from the head 
(via the nose— shiro virechana), using the herbs 
jatdmdnshi and gotu kola (brdhmi). 

















Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 20: Nervous System 


If the doshas are extremely excessed, these 
therapies are taken several times. The result of these 
therapies is the cleansing of the heart, head, senses, 
gastrointestinal tract. The mind gains alertness; 
memory and consciousness improve. Head 
evacuation is useful after cleansing if the person’s 
personality still shows signs of imbalance. 

Psychology: Therapeutic methods depend upon the 
symptoms. Methods include shouting, giving gifts, 
consoling, scaring. In this way, the cause of the i ll ness 
is confronted and dealt with. In serious cases, hitting 
and shocking, are advised. If insanity is caused by 
fear, grief, anger, passion, exhilaration, jealousy, or 
greed, approaching person’s with the opposite 
emotions will heal them. 

Miscellaneous therapies include, abhyahga, 
ingesting ghee to stimulate the mind, intellect, 
memory, and consciousness and applying thick 
ointments. 

General herbs to use include, trikatu with ghee; 
triphald, vidahga, chandan , mahjishthd, arjuna, 
dashmul, ghee. 

External: This is defined as signs and symptoms, 
different from those described above. These result 
from inappropriate past and present life deeds 
(intellectual blasphemy, or the disregarding of or 
malicious dealings with deities, spiritual people, 
parents and grandparents, teachers). 


or full moon days; intercourse during menstrual cycles, 
when reciting scriptures, or performing rites improperly; 
breaking one’s vows during battle, when performing 
destructive deeds, during inauspicious planetary 
positions, during child delivery (for women); contact 
with unclean or inauspicious creatures during emesis, 
purgation, and bleeding; when visiting sacred places 
when unclean and not following the prescribed rules; 
when eating remnants of meat, honey, oil, candy, and 
alcohol; when unclothed, visiting cities, towns, gardens, 
cremation grounds, cross roads, or slaughterhouses at 
night; when insulting holy people, teachers, gods; when 
misinterpreting scriptures, or when beginning any other 
inauspicious or harmful activity. 

External Causative Goals: The causing of insanity 
has three aims: to inflict injury, to play or to offer 
prayers. Playing or prayer forms of insanity can be 
healed. Inflicting injury includes burning, drowning, 
falling, or harming oneself (including suicide). 

Therapies: Herbs, such as musk and frankincense, 
chanting mantras! prayers (e.g., “Aum Namah 
Shivaya ”), wearing talismans and jewelry, performing 
auspicious rites, religious sacrifices, oblations, taking 
vows, fulfilling religious duties, atonement, fasting, 
receiving blessings, obeisance and pilgrimages. 
Following wholesome foods and life-styles is also 
necessary. Ghee may be eaten as often as desired. 
One should sleep in a draft-free room. 


Premonitory external symptoms: Desire to cause 
injury to deities, cows, holy people, religious places; 
anger, delinquent behavior, disliking things and habits 
that reduce one’s ojas, complexion, and strength; 
abuse and incitement by the gods, spirits, teachers. 

External Causes: Deities, preceptors, elders, holy 
people’s curses; appearance of the spirits of the de¬ 
ceased, demonic possession, or harassment. 

External Symptoms: Superhuman strength, energy, 
enthusiasm, charisma, memory; artistic, oration, and 
spiritual abilities in the person. 

Symptoms occur at the beginning of the above- 
mentioned deviant actions, when past karmas 
manifest in this life, when one is home alone or alone 
at a crossroad; sexual intercourse at sunset or on new 














The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Brahml Ghee- (4 days worth! 
brahmi —50 gms., Sharikh pushpl —50 gms., 
ashwagandha —50 gms., jatamanshl —50 gms., 
Ghee—100 gms. 

Dose: 1 tsp. 2 times daily 

Preparation: Make a paste from the herbs and roll 
into a ball, boil the ghee and add the paste and cook 
for 1/2 hour, filter. 

(May be used for any mental disorders) 

Insanity may also be caused by both internal and 
external factors. Thus, their signs and symptoms will 
be combined. When curable and incurable varieties 
of insanity appear together they all become incurable. 
For combinations of curable internal and external 
varieties, a combination of both therapies is suggested. 
Blood-letting is also advised for insanity. 

Signs or Recovery: 

When one’s clarity and sense of normalcy 
reappear, it is a sign that the symptoms are removed. 


Epilepsy (Apasmara) 

Causes: Epilepsy is defined as occasional 
unconsciousness with the vomiting of froth and 
abnormal body movements related to the distortion 
of memory, intellect, and other mental abilities. 

Four types of epilepsy exist: Vayu, Pitta, Kapha, 
and Tridosha. Sometimes external situations combine 
with internal doshas to cause this disease, but external 
events can never be the sole cause. 

Epilepsy will develop quickly in five instances: 
(1) when one’s mind has excess rajas and tamas; (2) 
when the doshas are excessed and imbalanced; (3) 
by eating unclean and unwholesome foods, eating 
mutually contradictory properties, eating foods 
contaminated by one having contagious diseases, or 
not eating according to one’s dosha; (4) not living 
according to one’s dosha; (5) when one is excessively 
debilitated. 

These situations aggravate the doshas that affect 
the mind full of rajas and tamas. The excessed doshas 
then spread to the heart (home of the soul and sense 


organs). This aggravates passion, anger, fear, greed, 
attachment, excitement, grief, anxiety, and leads to 
epilepsy. 

Premonitory Symptoms: Eyebrow contraction, 
constant, irregular eye movements, hearing non¬ 
existing sounds, excessive discharge of saliva and 
mucus, lack of hunger, anorexia, and indigestion; 
cardiac spasms, lower abdominal distention with 
gurgling sounds, weakness, cracking bone pain and 
debility, unconsciousness, entering darkness, fainting 
and giddiness, frequently dreaming of intoxication, 
dancing, murdering, aching, shivering, and falling. 

Symptoms: 

Vayu: Losing and regaining consciousness rapidly, 
projected eye balls, speaking incoherently, vomiting 
froth, excessive heaviness and a rigid neck, bending 
the head to the side, twisted fingers, unstableness of 
arms and legs. Other symptoms include reddish, dry, 
and brownish nails, eyes, face, and skin; objects 
appear as unstable, coarse, and dry (before losing 
consciousness). Symptoms increase from Vayu- 
increasing foods and life-styles. 

Pitta : Losing and gaining consciousness instantly, 
breathing with snoring sounds, rubbing the earth; 
green, yellow, or coppery nails, eyes, and complexion; 
objects appear as bleeding, terrifying, burning, and 
angry (before losing consciousness). Symptoms 
increase from Pitta-in-creasing foods and life-styles. 
Kapha: Slow to regain consciousness, falling, little 
distortion of activities, dribbling saliva, white nails, 
eyes, and complexion; objects appear as white, heavy, 
and oily (before losing consciousness). Symptoms 
increase from Kapha-increasing foods and life-styles. 
Tridosha: Symptoms of all three doshas. This 
condition is incurable. 

If any disease spreads sideways, it will become 

chronic. 
















Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 20: Nervous System 


Therapies: First, oleation and fomentation are applied. 
Internally-Caused: Next, for internally-caused epilepsy, 
the appropriate pahcha karma measures are used to 
cleanse and balance the heart, circulatory channels, 
and the mind that contain excess doshas. 

-Vayu epilepsy requires medicated enemas. 

- Pitta calls for purgation. 

- Kapha needs emetics. 

As with all diseases, the strength of the person 
afflicted with the illness must be considered. Then 
foods are given, beginning with light meals, then 
moving gradually to heavier ones. 

Extemallv-Caused: For epilepsy causes associated 
with external situations, mantras, prayers, rituals are 
suggested. Therapies include musk, chanting 
mantras! prayers (e.g., “Aum Namah Shivaya”), 
wearing talismans and jewelry, performing auspicious 
rites, religious sacrifices, oblations, and rites. Other 
therapies include taking vows, fulfilling religious 
duties, atonement, fasting, receiving blessings, 
obeisance, and pilgrimages. Following wholesome 
foods and life-styles is also necessary. Ghee may be 
taken as often as desired. Sleep should be taken in a 
draft-free room. 

Friends and spiritual leaders are advised to 
encourage understanding, patience, memory, and 
meditation. 

General Herbal Therapies: After purification, the 
person is strengthened, then alleviation therapies 
begin to heal the epilepsy. Ghee mixed with brdhml, 
bilwa, gokshura, triphald, turmeric, sandalwood, 
hihg, rock salt, pippall, calamus (vachd), and kutaj 
are useful. Mustard or sesame oil may also be added 
to these formulas. Brdhml ghee is also effective. 
Abhyahga is useful for both internal and external 
conditions. The above mentioned herbs are burned 
as aromatherapy (Shatdvarl and jatdmdnshl are added 
for inhalation). 

Medicated oils may also be placed in the nostrils 
(2 to 3 drops). Along with the above herbs, triphald, 
black pepper, ginger , pippall, jatdmdnshl, shatdvarl, 
gotu kola and musta may be added to the oil. 

Vdyu/Kapha: Guduchl, calamus, and guggul may be 
added to brdhml ghee. 

Chronic Epilepsy: If the disease is not healed through 


the above remedies, then one takes garlic with sesame 
or mustard oil, sluitdvarl with boiled milk , brdhml with 
raw honey, or calamus with raw honey. 


Addictions 

Symptoms: 

Vdvu: All addictions increase Vayu by causing a 
nervous dependency on them, resulting in a loss of 
objectivity. Vayu doshas can give up addictions for a 
while, but will begin them again or switch to another 
habit. 

Pitta: Unless these persons are convinced that a habit 
is bad for them, it will be very difficult to give up 
addictions. 

Kapha: These persons have the most difficult time 
giving up their bad habits due to attachment and 
because their constitution is strong enough to take 
more abuse. 

Smoking: Can be caused by any of the doshas. 
Vayu—These persons smoke to calm anxiety and 
worry. Symptoms include dry cough, constipation, 
and lung weakness. 

Pitta—These persons smoke to feel the fire and 
power. Symptoms include lung, liver, and blood 
infections. 

Kapha—These people smoke to feel clearer and 
stimulated. Symptoms include congestion. 

Alcohol: Increases fire in the body and 
damages the blood, liver, and causes other Pitta 
diseases. Because it contains sugar, alcohol may also 
be a substitute for sugar addiction (in Kapha and Vayu 
doshas mainly). 

Drugs: Damage the holy or sattwic mental 


















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


nature, dulling the mind and nerves. Hallucinogens 
raise the mental fire ( tejas), artificially creating clearer 
perception and an experience of higher consciousness. 
However, they bum up the life sap (ojas), weakening 
one’s overall vitality. Sleep-promoting drugs 
eventually cause insomnia. Smoking marijuana 
poisons the fiver and brain. It also causes fiver and 
lung cancer. 

Vayu—becomes greatly imbalanced from long¬ 
term drug use (prescription, non-prescription, and 
recreational). Drugs are also usually diuretics, causing 
constipation, dryness, weakening to the kidneys, and 
reduces fife sap (ojas). Stimulants overly aggravate 
Vayu. 

Pitta—short-term use of stimulants aggravates 
Pitta, causing burnout, eye damage. 

Kapha—sedatives overly increase dullness 
( tamas). All drugs increase dullness, inertia, and poor 
perception (for all doshas). 

General Therapies: 

General: Brain tonics help reduce emotional needs 
for addictive items, tissue-healing herbs for the fiver, 
lungs, brain, and immune system are also needed. 
Wholesome foods and life-styles according to one’s 
dosha are important. Understanding the nature of 
dependencies is also needed. Spiritual counseling 
helps to clarify the true nature of a person’s higher 
Self by transferring unhealthy addictions to addiction 
to devotion of the Divine. (This is a natural, gradual 
process that slowly fills the person with inner worth). 

Smoking: 

Vayu— ashwagandha, brdhmi, milk, almonds, 
sesame seeds, bald, and shatdvari return moisture to 
the lungs. 

Pitta— brdhmi, chamomile, aloe vera gel, 
bayberry, and shatdvari are good detoxing and toning 
herbs. 

Kapha— brdhmi, herbal cigarettes, and hot spices 
will clear up congestion after a person gives up 
smoking. 

Alcoholism: (see section specific for alcohol) 

Vayu— brdhmi is best for detoxifying the brain 

tissues. 

Pitta—aloe vera gel is best for balancing the 


functioning of the fiver. Other good fiver and blood 
herbs include brdhmi, katukd, bhudmalaki, and 
mahjishthd. Turmeric and barberry together clear 
congested emotions due to liver toxins. 

Kapha—turmeric and barberry together clear 
congested emotions due to liver toxins. 

Drugs : 

Drinking fresh juice of grapes, dates, or pomegranates 
is excellent for reducing addiction. 

Generally, the best diet is a Vayu-Pitta-reducing 
diet. Ghee nourishes the nerves, jatdmdnshi is an 
excellent sleep-promoting herb. Yogaraj guggul 
cleanses the deeper tissues. Brdhmi cleanses 
hallucinogens from the fiver and brain. 

Vayu— ashwagandha rebuilds the nervous 
system. Calamus restores mental faculties and clears 
toxins from the fiver and brain caused by marijuana. 


Alcohol Recovery (Madat-yaya) 

Whereas improper use of foods can lead to 
disease or even death, drinking also leads to loss of 
self-worth, life path, wealth, true pleasure, 
intelligence, and courage. 

Ashtanga Hridayam: 

Nidanasthana; Ch.6/ver. 11 

Properties of Wine and Alcohol: The properties of 
alcohol are the opposite of fife sap (ojas), and similar 
to poisons. The only difference is that alcohol is less 
potent than poison, so it does not kill the person. 
Alcohol penetrates deeply into the tissues. It is dry 
and causes drying, sourness; spreads throughout the 
body, and is heating. Alcohol loosens bone joints, 
dries fife sap, and causes mental disorders. There are 
3 stages to addiction. 











Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 20: Nervous System 


First stage: Causes a loss of life sap and begins 
mental imbalances. 

Second stage: Persons are at a critical point in 
choosing harmful activities and enjoying thinking 
about them. They begin to think they will receive tme 
happiness from these choices. The mind is primarily 
in a state of rajas (agitation-/ irritation-promoting) 
and tamas (slowing, clouding, dulling) during this 
stage. Persons may go on wild rampages of harmful 
activity. This is where vices and self-destruction begin. 

Of all thy ways to bring self-destruction, drinking 
(i.e., alcohol and wine) is the most harmful. 
Ashtanga Hridayam: Nidan; Ch. 6, verse 6 

Third stage: A person lies lifeless on the ground. 
The experience is one of being poisoned. 

Hazards: Loss of understanding right from wrong, 
happiness or unhappiness, beneficial or harmful, suit¬ 
able or unsuitable. Drinking causes delusion, fear, 
grief, anger, insanity, infatuation, fainting, epilepsy, 
convulsions, and death. Further, loss of memory, 
awareness, and common sense occur. 

[Strong mental and physical Kapha persons who 
come from families that drinks with meals as a daily 
habit and have strong digestion do not become greatly 
intoxicated or addicted.] 

Causes: 

Vayu: When one is emaciated as a result of sex, 
grief, fear, travel, carrying overly heavy objects, eating 
rough or too little amounts of food, and then drinking 
rough, old wine in large amounts in the night, will 
disturb sleep. It causes Vayu alcoholism. 

Pitta : When one takes large quantities of hot, sour, 
and sharp wines, while eating hot and sharp foods, it 
bums the plasma and lymph, transforming their 
character into alkaline. The result is internal 
symptoms of burning, fever, thirst, mental confusion, 
giddiness, and narcosis. This leads to Pitta alcoholism 

Kapha: When one takes large amounts of fresh, 
sweet wine, while eating sweet, oily, and heavy foods 
and takes frequent naps, and no exercise, Kapha 
alcoholism is caused. 


Symptoms: 

General: Profound delusion, heart discomfort, 
diarrhea, constant thirst, mild or severe fever, loss of 
taste and appetite, pain in the head, ribs, and bones; 
tremors, twitching, sharp pain in the vital organs and 
upper back, constricted chest, blindness, coma, cough, 
hiccup, swelling, ear, eye, and mouth disorders; 
mental disorders and confusion, unintelligent speech, 
vomiting, nausea, anorexia, thirst, severe yawning, 
dizziness, giddiness delusion, delirium, hallucination, 
nightmares. 

Vayu: Insomnia, hiccup, difficult breathing, 
tremors, headache, dreams of wandering, pain in the 
sides, falling, and talking with demons. Speech 
becomes impaired, talking becomes fast, delirious, 
slurred, and unsteady; activity is hindered, 
complexion becomes dry and blackish-red. 

Pitta: Burning sensation, fever, perspiration, 
fainting, giddiness delusion, diarrhea, thirst, dizziness, 
green or reddish-yellow complexion, reddish eyes and 
cheeks, quick to anger, argumentative. 

Kapha: Vomiting, excess sleep, skin rashes, 
anorexia, nausea, heaviness. One talks less, slurred 
speech, worry, laziness and lack of enthusiasm, 
yellowish-white complexion, cold feeling. 

Triclosha: Symptoms of all three doshas. 

Miscellaneous: Suddenly starting drinking after 
stopping for a long time creates two types of diseases 
of Vayu origin that are difficult to heal and one type 
of Pitta origin. 

Type 1—expectorating mucus, dry throat, excess 
sleep, irritated by noise, stupor. 

Type 2—severe pain in the head and body, heart and 
throat disorders, delusion, cough, thirst, vomiting, 
fevers. 

Type 3—When one sees blood or develops an in¬ 
creased volume of blood, the body becomes stiff, eyes 
are fixed in a gaze, other Pitta symptoms occur. 

Alcoholism leads to fainting, and develops into a 
loss of consciousness. The channels of plasma, blood, 
and consciousness become obstructed. 




















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Therapies: All forms of alcoholism are tridosha, so one 
first attends to the most excessed dosha (although gen¬ 
erally Kapha is the most excessed). If all three doshas 
are simultaneously imbalanced, one begins healing 
Kapha, then Pitta, and lastly Vayu. 

Vayu: When wine causes the air to block the 
channels, it causes head, bone, and joint pain. To 
moisten Vayu (i.e., restore balance), Vayu-reducing 
foods are taken, followed by salty wine (made from 
flour) with amalaki and ginger. This improves 
absorption, sharpness, and hotness. This dissipates 
the obstructions, dispels wind, and increases appetite. 
Foods include sours (e.g., pickles, yogurt), barley, 
wheat, basmati rice, vegetables, hot baths, ointments, 
enemas, ghee, milk, oil massage. 

Vdyu/Pitta: When these doshas are in excess, if 
one feels great thirst, cold grape juice removes the 
imbalances. After food is digested, persons drink 
yogurt/water ( lassi) with cane sugar, followed by cold 
water boiled with must a and amalaki, to quench thirst. 
A paste of amalaki, barley flour, and ghee may also 
be placed in the mouth to quench thirst. 

Pitta: Alcoholism caused by excess intake of 
sharp, hot, sour, and burning wine is healed by cold, 
sour, grape wine with sugar, pomegranate, and roasted 
barley flour, having secondary tastes of sweet, 
pungent, bitter, and astringent. The acid and wine 
combination neutralizes the alkali. Foods include 
ghee, cane sugar and amalaki mixed with basmati 
rice, peas, green lentils, amalaki water. 

Cold water boiled with musta and amalaki, 
quenches thirst. A paste of amalaki, barley flour, and 
ghee may also be placed in the mouth for alleviating 
thirst. Other therapies include, cold drinks and foods, 
sandalwood water, or drinking cool water from gold, 
silver, or bronze vessels. External therapies include 
cool rooms and breezes, moonlight walks, wearing 
clothes made of flax, and being near lotus and lily 
flowers. Green gems (e.g., emerald, jade), pearls, and 
moonstones further reduce Pitta alcoholism. 

For burning sensations, sandalwood, lotus, or lily 
water is sprinkled on the body; cold baths or showers. 
Further, beautiful scenery, melodious music, jokes, 
and peaceful conversation balance this disease. 

Pitta/Kapha: When both are excessed in the 
stomach, it causes burning and thirst. Grape juice or 
water is taken, then vomiting is induced to heal this 


illness quickly. Whenever the desire for alcohol 
appears, grape juice or water is immediately taken. 
This stimulates the digestion, which in turn digests 
the undigested food toxins. 

If there is bleeding cough, pain in the breasts and 
sides, thirst, burning, excess doshas in the heart and 
chest, one takes guduchl, vdsdk durba, musta, ginger, 
ghee, and sugar cane juice. 

Kapha: If alcoholism is caused by faulty or excess 
drinking, it is merely healed by moderation. First, 
fasting and emesis are used. Eater, herbs are used to 
remove dma, improve appetite, and return one’s 
lightness. 

When thirst and fever develop, persons drink warm 
water boiled with bald, or cooled water boiled with 
bald, musta, and ginger, to help digest the alcohol 
excesses. When dma is removed and appetite returns, 
cold wine with water, rock salt, and fresh ginger and 
honey is taken in moderation. 

Small portions of food, including barley or wheat 
with ginger; thin vegetable soup with dried radish 
and pungents like ginger, sours l ik e amalaki, and a 
little ghee. 

To promote appetite, white seedless grape juice, 
pomegranate juice, pungent herbs, cardamom, 
turmeric, and black pepper are mixed with raw honey. 

Foods include hot foods and drinks. External 
therapies include hot baths and steam, physical 
exercise, staying up late and waking early, no naps, 
dry-body massage (promotes strength and 
complexion), and wearing rough heavy garments. 
Inhaling warm aromas, such as frankincense and 
cedar, is also helpful. 












Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 20: Nervous System 


If the above measures are not effective, wines should 
not be drunk, but substituted with boiled milk with 
cinnamon, ghee, and honey. Gradually return to small 
amounts of wine. 


Fainting (Murcha) 

When drinking continues and one’s health 
becomes more seriously impaired, fainting occurs as 
a second, more serious stage of this illness. 

Symptoms: 

Vayu: One sees the surrounding space as light red, 
black, or blue; enters darkness or unconsciousness, 
then shortly regains awareness. Symptoms include 
heart pain, tremors, dizziness, emaciation, and a 
blackish-red complexion. 

Pitta : Surrounding space is red or yellow. The 
person becomes unconscious, then soon after regains 
consciousness. One feels sweat, burning sensation, 
thirst, increased heat, diarrhea, blue or yellow feces, 
reddish or yellow eyes, and an unsteady gaze. 

Kapha: One’s surrounding awareness is cloudy, 
resulting in fainting. Persons return to consciousness 
after a long time. The heart is oppressed and one 
develops increased salivation. The body feels heavy 
and restricted, as if walking in soaking wet clothes. 

Tridosha: Includes symptoms of all three doshas 
and falling to the ground in a faint. 

Therapies: 

General: Constant sprinkling or spraying of water 
over the body, plunging one into a cold bath, contact 
with cold gems and flower garlands, cold compresses 
and plasters, cold breeze and fanning, cold-scented 
drinks (i.e., all cooling measures). 

Draksha (medicated grape wine), pomegranate 
juice, rice, and barley are suggested foods and drinks. 
Herbs include ndgkeshar and black pepper; pippall 
and raw honey, hantakl decoction and ghee, dinalakl 
and ghee. 


Comas (Samnyasa) 

When drinking continues, one’s health becomes 
most seriously impaired. The coma is the third and 
most dangerous stage of drinking. Therefore, before 
persons decide to drink, they must think about many 
factors. 


Alcohol Factors Considered for Avoiding Comas 


Alcohol Factors Considered 
for Avoiding Comas 

physical 

strength 

drink 

potency 

season 

time of 
day 

place 

dosha 

age 

quantity 
used to 




drinking 


As the accumulation of all three doshas become 
aggravated together and get local iz ed in the mind and 
intellect, speech, body and mind become impaired. 
Persons become stiff as a log, and therapy must be 
given immediately. 

Therapies include strong snuff, strong collyrium, 
passive snuffing (i.e., someone else blowing snuff into 
the client’s nose), pricking needles under the nails, 
pulling hairs, touching the person with a hot object, 
or putting sour and bitter tastes in the mouth. Once 
persons regain consciousness, they are given juices 
of fresh garlic and lemon, with saffron, trikatu, and 
salt. A light, easily digestible meal is also taken. 

































The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Atrophy (Kshaya) 

Cause : Atreya discusses atrophy (phthisis) after 
epilepsy because after falling during a seizure, the 
chest may become injured. Atrophy is listed in this 
book under nervous system disorders. It is this injury 
to the chest that can cause atrophy or emaciation. 
Internally, it is caused by a deficiency of semen 
(shukra) and fife sap (ojas). These deficiencies result 
from an overindulgence in sex and other life-sap- 
depleting habits, such as fasting, eating dry foods, 
and eating small quantities of food. Other causes 
include eating at the wrong time or season, eating 
foods of only one taste (i.e., either sweet, or salty, or 
sour, or pungent, or bitter, or astringent). 

Since ojas originates in the heart, injury to the chest 
will also deplete this life sap. Other causes include 
excessive straining during sports or work (e.g., lifting 
weights that are too heavy, singing scriptures at the 
top of one’s voice, hard jolts to the body). Thus, it is 
a disease of Vayu dosha. 

Development and Premonitory Signs: As a result of 
any of these causes, the chest becomes broken, 
cracked, or perforated, the chest thus becomes 
squashed. This causes emaciation and tremors that 
slowly lead to the loss of strength, complexion, 
appetite, and digestive fire (agni). Fever, pain, 
depression, and diarrhea develop (although Pitta is 
deficient, the suppression of digestive power can cause 
diarrhea). Symptoms include, coughing up 
malodorous, grayish, yellow, and knotty phlegm with 
large amounts blood. When semen and ojas are 
diminished from the above causes, emaciation also 
becomes worse. 

Symptoms: The main signs of chest injury are 
vomiting, bleeding, and coughing. The main 
symptoms of semen and ojas deficiency is blood in 
the urine, and torso stiffness. 

When the signs and symptoms are mild, when the 
patient is strong, or if the situation has just occurred, 
then the person can be healed. If the disease has lasted 
for more than 1 year, then it can only be controlled 
(i.e., the symptoms can diminish but may return if 
not careful). Should all the signs and symptoms si¬ 
multaneously present themselves, the disease is in¬ 
curable. 


Therapy: 

New injury: Coagulative herbs (astringents) l ik e 
raspberry and ndgkeshar (stop bleeding), taken with 
boiled milk and raw honey. 

Chest and rib or urinary bladder pain: (with poor 
digestion) Herbs include g uggul, vasdk, neem, 
chopchini, turmeric, with boiled milk, and raw honey 
or cane sugar. 

Diarrhea: Ishabgol (and must a if Vayu is not 
excessed) 

Strong digestion: Herbs include coagulatives with 
boiled milk, ghee, and raw honey or cane sugar. 

To heal injuries: (same therapies as chest/rib). 

Fever and burning sensation: (same therapies as 
chest/rib). 

Cough and rib and bone pain: Herbs include pippall, 
bald, ghee, and raw honey. 

Limping: Ghee with rock salt are suggested. 
Weakness, emaciation, chest injury, insomnia, excess 

Vayu: Herbs include turmeric, shatdvarl, 
ashwagandha, bald, ghee, and raw honey or cane 
sugar. 

Weight loss, muscle emaciation, no appetite, debility: 

Therapies include cane sugar, barley, wheat, raw 
honey; and afterwards, boiled milk, ashwagandha, 
durba, pippall, turmeric, and honey, with ghee —to 
promote blood, tissues, and muscle development. 
Chest injury with semen loss: Shatdvarl, 
ashwagandha, ashoka, and vasdk are suggested. 
Chest injury: Boil brdhml ghee (page 468) with equal 
amounts of milk . As an option, a decoction of 4 times 
as much licorice as ghee may be added to the brdhml 
ghee. 

Muscle and Blood Builder: 1/4 to 1/2 tsp. pippall 
and the remainder of the teaspoon with raw honey, 
taken for a week. Then for 2 to 3 days, this mixture is 
not taken. This regimen is continued as described. 
Fever and cough: Sitopaladi and cane sugar are 
advised. 

Emaciated women: Viddri kand, dmalakl, and sesame 
seed tahini are advised. 




























Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 20: Nervous System 


Debility and loss of body weight: Therapies include 
ashwagandha, shatavari, dmalaki, ghee, and wheat 
flour. 

Urinary bladder, uterus or kidney problems, or loss 

of semen or ovum, due to excess sexual indulgence: 

Ghee with ashwagandha, shatavari, and dashmul are 
suggested. When persons are strong, a medicated 
enema is also useful. 

Poor digestion: Therapies include barley powder, raw 
honey, and brdhmi ghee. 


Multiple Sclerosis 

In the nerve cell, axons and dendrites (see 
diagram below) are covered by cells that contain 
myelin (a fatty substance needed for normal 
conduction of electrical impulses). Certain diseases 
attack myelin and the cells that produce it. The cells 
are stripped of myelin or scarring (plaque) is caused. 
This causes the nerves to partially or completely stop 
normal nerve impulse conduction. 



Dendrite Heads 



Multiple sclerosis (MS) is the most common of 
these demyelinating diseases. However, it is not 
equally present throughout the world. Although it is 
prevalent in the U.S., it is not equally distributed 
within the country. MS is mainly concentrated in 
temperate climates (and rarely found in tropical or 
arctic regions). Thus, western science feels there may 
be a geographic or climactic influence. MS is a disease 
involving the central nervous system. 

From the Ayurvedic standpoint, MS results from 
Vayu and Pitta excesses, caused by anxiety (Vayu) 
that leads to hypertension. An inability to withstand 
heat can develop. 

Therapies 

Herbs that calm and strengthen the nerves and 
immune system are very useful. A special gold ash 
preparation (Survana Vasant Maiti) work best but is 
more costly than plain herbs [1 pill daily—in the 
morning—with 1/2 tsp. raw honey]. 

Females—After age 50 Pitta is affected. Herbs 
include jatdmdnshi, shatavari, ashwagandha, yogaraj 
guggul, triphald, brdhmi. The healing process is 
longer after age 40. 





















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Males—The healing process is longer after age 
50. Herbs include vachd, shatdvarl, ashwagandha, 
yogaraj guggul, triphald, and brdhml. 

Other important therapies include shiro dhara (hot 
oil head drips) and shiro bhyahga (head-oil baths), 
as they reduce the excess Vayu in the head, and calm 
and tone the nerves of the brain and body. Seven or 
14 sessions (daily or alternating days), 30 to 45 
minutes per session, is advised as an optimum 
program. 

Hatha yoga is another effective therapy to slow 
and reduce the effects of MS. Mind-body 
coordination, muscle and nerve toning, immune 
building, and increased flexibility are the benefits of 
practicing yoga postures. 

For MS pain, rubbing sesame oil mixed with 
mahdndrdyan oil on the body has been found to be 
very effective; people report that pain is stopped for 
several hours at a time. 

Following a food plan according to one’s dosha 
is also required. Fifestyle changes may be necessary 
to reduce undue stress in one’s life. 

Nasya with medicated brain oils like Shad bindu 
are also very helpful—3-6 drops per . 

Parkinson’s Disease 

This is a condition that develops from a loss of 
dopamine-producing cells in the substantia nigra area 
of the basal ganglia. Although it usually affects 
persons after age 50, it sometimes is found in persons 
as young as age 35. 


Symptoms: 

Early stages are slight shaking of hands during fine 
hand movement. Advanced symptoms include shak¬ 
ing or tremor, stiffness or rigidity, hindered walking 
and stooped posture. 

Therapies: 

Generally this is a Vayu or Vayu/Pitta condition 
(sometimes Vayu/Kapha). All therapies for MS are 
advised here, especially kapikachhu, abhyahga, shiro 
dhara, nasya (e.g., shad bindu oil), basti, yoga 
postures 

Alzheimer’s Disease 

The exact cause of Alzheimer’s disease is not yet 
known to Western medicine. However, it is considered 
a function of the nervous system. Nerve cells in the 
memory region of the brain are found to be greatly 
reduced in size and number as compared with those 
of a healthy person. 

Tourette’s syndrome, ataxia, aphasia, stuttering, 
dyslexia, and other diseases of the brain and nervous 
system are modem names for conditions that have 
not been found in ancient India. Thus, their therapies 
have not been specifically discussed. 

For all nervous system disorders one can follow 
therapies for MS and other previously discussed 
diseases based on similar symptoms. Kapikachhu has 
been found to be especially effective in Parkinson’s 
research. 

One who is ever mindful of their life purpose 
and how they are living, 
their life will never become sad. 

Ashtanga Hridayam Su. Ch. 2 : ver. 47 







Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 20: Nervous System 


































The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 




J MjdxrLcmljcjCLL § 7 It-IlLIlA- 






Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 21: Skin Disorders 


Education is a development from within, not an accretion from without; it comes through the 
workings of natural instincts and not in response to external force; it is an expansion of natural 
powers, not an acquisition of information; it is life itself, not a preparation for a future state 
remote in interests and characteristics from the life of childhood. 

Rousseau 


Chapter 21 
Skin Disorders 


Warts, Skin, Leukoderma, Herpes Zoster 



Warts 

hen Vayu and Kapha combine on the 
skin, they are nail-like in appearance, 
hard, rough, and immovable. When 
Vayu predominates, pain and roughness develop. 
With Pitta predominance they look blackish-red. 
Should Kapha predominate they are greasy, knotty, 
and the same color as the s kin . 

Kapha creates soft s ki n. Pitta causes hard s ki n. 
They combine when following incompatible thera¬ 
pies (e.g., ingesting milk and salt together), and cause 
warts. 


Therapies: Externally, lemon juice or tea-tree oil ap¬ 
plied to the warts (daily, for several weeks). 

Warts are similar to hemorrhoids in their devel¬ 
opment and appearance. Thus, therapies are the same 
as for hemorrhoids. 


cal locations. The combinations of dosha and loca¬ 
tions cause various pains, colors, shapes, and mani¬ 
festations; although they are produced by the same 
causes. For example, in some cases the quality of 
dryness of Vayu is excessed, while at other times the 
coldness of Vayu is predominant. 

Skin diseases are caused by ingesting mutually 
contradictory foods and drinks (e.g., fish [hot] and 
mi lk [cold]). They can also be caused by suppressing 
any of the natural urges, exercise after meals or un¬ 
der very hot weather conditions; fasting, and eating 
heavy meals. Other causes include drinking cold 
water just after being in the hot sun, fright, raw foods, 
eating before the last meal is digested. Improper use 
of pahcha karma and its follow-up therapies also can 
cause s ki n diseases. Further causes include exces¬ 
sive eating of yogurt, salt, fish, radish, pastries, sesame 
seeds, milk and sugar, and sour foods. External causes 
include, sex after meals, naps, insulting holy people, 
Gums, and other sinful actions. 


Obstinate Skin Diseases (Kushtha) 

Causes: These arise from aggravated Vayu, Pitta, and 
Kapha that become deranged by four tissues ( dhatus): 
skin-plasma/lymph (rasa/lasikd), muscle (rndmsa), 
and blood (rakta). Then, they spread throughout the 
body. 

The beginning stages of s ki n diseases are caused 
only by the four dhcitus, but eventually spread to the 
other dhatus. All skin disorders involve the three 
doshas and four dhatus (i.e., plasma, lymph, blood, 
and muscle). The various types of disorders depend 
upon the combinations of the doshas and their physi^. 


Some say there are many skin disease 
classifications. Others say 18 (major and minor) s ki n 
disorders occur. Still others say only 7 types exist. 
Discussed below, are the 7 major classifications. 

Premonitory Signs : Fack of, or excess perspiration; 
discoloration, itching, pricking pain, numbness, tin¬ 
gling, burning, hair standing on end, rough or exces¬ 
sively smooth skin, coarseness, heaviness, frequent 
development of edema, spreading severely, sticky 
excreta in body orifices, excessive pain from oozing, 
wounds are difficult to hear. After these signs, the 
individual symptoms appear. 









The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Seven Major Skin Diseases 
(Maha-Kushthas) 

Depending upon the degree of excess, many 
permutations of skin disorders exist. Charak and 
Sushrut have different listings of major and minor 
skin diseases. This is due to the differences of suigical 
and medicinal therapies. Below are 7 major s kin 
diseases. 

Kaphala: (macula caelulum/azure colored spots) due 
to excess Vayu—dry, reddish, rough, and with rough 
edges; uneven, thin, slightly elevated on the edges, 
excessive numbness, bristly hairs and great pain, 
burning, pus, black or azure in color. They develop 
instantly, and are difficult to heal. 

Udumbara: Due to Pitta—coppery, and covered with 
coppery colored hair; thick with copious, thick pus, 
blood, and oozing; itching, sticky oozing, burning, 
and hot. The manifestation and ulceration happen 
instantly. 

Mandala: Due to Kapha—oily, heavy, swollen, 
smooth and yellow borders; white and red colored, 
and covered with many white hairs; excessive, thick, 
slimy, white, sticking oozing, itching, round; they 
develop slowly, are difficult to heal. [Charak Samhitci] 
lAruna: Caused by Vayu, is light ver mili on colored, 
thin, spreading, pricking and piercing pain, numb to 
the touch—listed in Sushrut Samhitci as one of the 
seven instead of Mandala.] 

Risyaiihva: Due to Vayu/Pitta—rough, reddish with 
dark brown centers and edges; they can be blue, 
yellow, and coppery shaded; excessive burning, 
cutting, piercing pain and pus, elevated centers and 
thin edges, rough pimples, elongated and round, and 
they develop instantly. 

Pundarika: Due to Kapha/Pitta—white and red with 
red edges and covered with red lines and blood 
vessels, swelling, thick excessive discharge of blood 
and pus, itching, circular, raised, burning, and develop 
slowly. 

Sidhrna (macule atrophica): Due to Kapha/ Vayu— 
rough, reddish, fissured edges with thin centers, 
smooth, dusty, white and red shaded; there are many 
of them; they are generally found on the chest, and 
they develop slowly. [Atreya says it is a major illness, 
while Sushrut considers it a minor one]. 

Dadru (ringworm): Faint blue or coppery, spreading, 


pimples, itching, circular, slow to develop, raised. 
[Atreya lists as a minor i ll ness. He sees it being caused 
by all three doshas. Sushrut considers it minor, based 
on surgical measures. Further, he sees it being caused 
by Vayu and Kapha]. 

Kdkanaka: Atreya says it is due to Tridoshic 
symptoms; all forms of s ki n diseases are experienced, 
many colors yet mostly red, and cannot be healed 
due to the vitiation of all three doshas (all other forms 
of disorders are healable). Sushrut says it is due to 
Pitta, black, sucking or burning pain, emitting hot 
fumes, developing pus and break rapidly, eventually 
they develop parasites. 

Tridoshic: Simultaneous aggravation of all three 
doshas are caused by 

1) Eating cold and hot foods, and nourishing and 
depleting diets. 

2) Excess and long term use of honey, fish, radish 
while there is indigestion. 

3) Excessive sexual intercourse, exercise, and heat 
exposure before digesting meals. 

4) Suppressing the urge for emesis. 

5) Excessive oleation. 

6) Entering cold water just after developing fear, grief, 
and exhaustion. 

These habits aggravate the doshas in the four 
dhatus, and weaken them. Due to this weakening, 
the tissues (dhatus) cause skin disorders. 


11 Minor Symptoms 
(Kshudra Kushthas) 

Eka (ichthyosis): Vavu/Kapha—no perspiration, vast, 
localized groupings, scaly (like a fish), reddish color, 
not healable. 

Charma (hypertrophy): Vayu/Kapha—thick s ki n 
patches (like elephant skin), burning, restlessness, pus, 
piercing pain, epileptic fits and loss of consciousness, 
sucking, drawing pain in the palms and soles (with 
itching). 

Kitima (keloid tumors): Vayu/Kapha—blackish- 
brown, rough (excessive scar tissue), hard to the 



















Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 21: Skin Disorders 


touched. 

Channanclala: Pitta/Kapha—redness, itching, pus¬ 
tules, pain, s ki n cracks, and tender. 

Pdmd (eczema): Pitta/Kapha—great itching, white, 
red, or blackish/brown small pimples, itching, burn¬ 
ing secretion. 

Vicarchikd (psoriasis): Kapha—blackish-brown, itch¬ 
ing, copious oozing, great pain, dry cracks on hands, 
feet and body. 

Vipddikd (lower psoriasis): 

Vayu/Kapha—cracks in palms and soles, great pain, 
burning, found only in the lower extremities. 
Sphota: Pitta/Kapha—thin, white or reddish pustules. 
Shatdru: Pitta/Kapha—red or blackish-brown ulcer¬ 
ated patches, burning and pain. 

Alasaka: Vayu/Kapha—nodular growth with great 
itching and redness. 

[All s ki n diseases (Kushthas) are the same causes 
as Erysipelas (Visarpa) —an acute disease of the sub¬ 
cutaneous tissues—only Koshthd develops gradually, 
while Visarpa spreads very quickly.] 

[Parisarpa, Visarpa, Kachus, Rakasd, Mahd 
Kushtham, Sthuldrushka, Kildsam; Sushrut sees these 
as minor diseases.] 

Sthuldrushka: Kapha—pimples around the joints that 
are very thick at their base, difficult to heal, with hard 
pimples on the surface. 

Mahd-kushtham: Kapha—contracted skin bursts, 
causing piercing pain, loss of sensation and general 
lassitude. 

Visarpa: (discussed in its own section) 


and sweat further weaken the doshas and cause 
secondary disorders. 

Vdyu: Blackish brown or reddish in color, rough, dry, 
piercing or pricking pain, emaciation, trembling, hair 
standing on end, stiffness, numbness, exhaustion, 
ulcerations, and fissures. 

Pitta : Burning, sweating, tissue softening, 
putrefaction, oozing, pus, and redness. 

Kapha: Whiteness, coldness, itching, steadiness, 
heaviness, swelling, oiliness, and stic ki ness. 

Four Dhdtus: Germs eat away at the skin, muscles, 
blood, plasma, vessels, ligaments, bones, and 
cartilage, causing oozings, ulcerated organs, thirst, 
fever, diarrhea, burning, weakness, anorexia, and 
indigestion. 

The simultaneous excesses of all three doshas are 
the cause of all forms of skin diseases, yet some 
doshas are predominant for each variety. The 
predominant dosha and the causes of the illness are 
learned from the specific form of the disease, and 
vice versa. Thus, after analyzing the signs and 
symptoms, the dosha that is predominant is balanced 
first, then the other doshas are healed later. 


Pitta—pimples in the skin, blood and fat, quickly 
spread over the entire body, with burning, restlessness, 
pus, piercing pain, and epileptic fits leading to 
fainting. 

Parisarpa: Vayu—oozing pimples that slowly spread 
over the entire body. 

Kachus (localized eczema): Pdmd symptoms with 
burning are found only on the legs, hands, and 
buttocks. 

Rakasd (dry erythema/abnormal red skin due to 

irritation and dilation of capillaries): Kapha—dry, 
non- oozing pimples, intense itching, all over the body. 

Complications: If s ki n disorders are not tended to 
properly, germs in the skin, muscles, blood, oozings, 


tk 





.4? "s* 


JL 

























The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Rough, dry, hard, scaly skin, coarse, hair standing 
on edge, brown and red, itching, constipation, 
distention, increased by wind and dryness; oils are 
soothing. Therapies include Vayu-reducing foods, 
liquids and life-styles; castor oil laxatives, enemas, 
sesame oil massage, triphala, guggul, myrrh, 
shatdvarl, and cardamom. 

Pitta Symptoms and Therapies: Burning, redness, 
oozing, malodor, stickiness of limbs, swelling, 
infection, fever, irritability; increased by heat; oil 
make them worse. Therapies include Pitta-reducing 
foods, drinks, and lifestyle; avoiding nightshades 
(eggplants, peppers, tomatoes, potatoes, peaches, 
strawberries), sour, and hot things. Helpful therapies 
include coconut juice, aloe vera gel, cilantro juice, 
gotu kola, and bhrihgardj oils (internally and 
externally); herbs include gotu kola, burdock, red 
clover, chirdyatd, aloe, rhubarb, manjishthd, 
bhudmalakl. 

Kapha Symptoms and Therapies: White complexion, 
cold, localized, raised, heavy, sticky, unsightly, 
oozing, congestion, edema, itching; increased by 
damp and cold weather, and oil. Therapies include 
Kapha-reducing foods, drinks, and lifestyle; avoiding 
heavy, greasy, and oily foods including cheese and 
yogurt, and external oil massage. Helpful herbs 
include burdock, gokshura, guggul, triphala, 
manjishthd, ginger, bhudmalakl, and gotu kola. 

Therapies: It is said that the skin condition is not able 
to be healed if, tridoshic symptoms exist; symptoms 
develop in weak persons, while experiencing great 
thirst and burning sensations, poor digestion, and if 
the patches have bugs in them. 

Preliminary Therapies 

Vdyu: First—enema using oils and ghee. 

Pitta : First—purgation (and blood-letting) using 
triphala. 

Kapha: First—emetic therapy when the doshas are 
excessed in the heart or center of the body, and are 
not stuck or rooted in the upper part of the body. 
Emetics include kutaj, neem, and honey. 

When the doshas are greatly excessed, these 
preliminary therapies are repeated several times, 
always monitoring one’s health and strength, as these 


therapies may weaken the patient and their Vayu. 
Secondary Therapies 

Only after the doshas are significantly reduced, 
oleation therapy is given repeatedly. After the 
therapies, one begins a food diet that balances their 
doshas. [Beginning with thin gruel-thick gruel, 
vegetable soup, etc. as describe in the pahcha karma 
section of Chapter 7. Thin gruel is taken for three 
meals, then for two meals, and then for one meal.] 
Medicated enemas are also taken, using barley and 
musta ,with ghee or oil (e.g., sesame, canola, 
sunflower). 

If excess Vayu still exists even after these 
therapies, food plan, and enema, one takes an 
anuvasana medicated enema of oil mixed with 
haritakl and triphala (depending upon their strength). 
Inhalation Therapy: Rock salt, black pepper, pippall, 
jatdmdnshl, and gotu kola are inhaled to heal s ki n 
diseases (and parasitic infections and Kapha diseases). 

Medicated ghee may be used internally and 
externally to heal skin conditions of the three doshas. 
Pitta-, blood-, and Kapha-caused imbalances use 
bitter and astringent herbs (e.g., musta, raspberry). 

Kapha skin disorders are healed with chitrak, 
guduchl, cardamom, chakramarda, sarsaparilla, 
kushtha, and punarnavd. 

Vayu— triphala, musta, raspberry, manjishthd, 
gokshura, chitrak, neem, guduchl, cardamom, 
punarnavd, and calamus arc useful for Vayu. 

Vayu or Kapha : Decoctions of trikatu, triphala, cane 
sugar, and sesame oil, taken for 1 month. Herbs are 
mixed in equal amounts. These decoctions are also 
applied externally to the skin. Massaging the 
decoctions (mixed with oil) into the skin also 
promotes healing. Vayu uses sesame oil, Pitta, 
sunflower or coconut oil, Kapha uses mustard or 
canola oil. Sesame or mustard oil decoctions of 
bdkuchl, trikatu, kutaj, and vidahga are massaged into 
the s kin quickly prevents the bursting of mandala s kin 
diseases and itching. 

Sidhma and newly occurring likdsa leukoderma 
can be healed. Herbs include bdkuchl, kushtha, and 
manjishthd. A 

















Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 21: Skin Disorders 


Channel, eka, kitima and alasaka skin disorders 
are healed with medicated ghee and oil, boiled with 
mahjishtha, sarsaparilla, an equal quantity of milk, 
and bees’ wax. 

Manclala herbs include vidahga, vachd, neem, arka, 
chitrak, musta, kutaj, castor oil, and trikatu. The s ki n 
is massaged with sesame or mustard oil. 

Vayu and Kapha skin disorders are healed with 
chitrak, guduchi, cardamom, and punamavd, mixed 
with 1/4 yogurt and 3/4 water. Vatsaka, sandalwood/ 
barley decoction for Pitta. Pitta and Kapha herbs 
include sandalwood, kushtha, and kutki. 

Vayu/Pitta: Herbs include khair, sandalwood, neem, 
red sandalwood, triphald, and ghee. 

For burning patches, or s ki n diseases in general, 
massage with a triphald decoction mixed with 
sandalwood, pippali, turmeric, musta, red 
sandalwood, khair, turmeric, licorice, vatsaka, and 
ghee. These herbs are also for Charmadala s ki n 
disorder, stickiness, scaling, shedding skin disjointing, 
or burning, along with water dripped on the s ki n. 

Sidhma: Herbs include kutaj bark, nilotpalam, and 
satyanasha (yellow thistle). 

When skin disorders are predominantly blood and 
Pitta excessed, vdsdk, bdkuchi, guduchi, mahjishtha, 
neem, and ghee are used. 

When disjointedness, serious exudation, or mag¬ 
gots appear, persons take a neem and vidahga bath. 
After the blood is purified, paheha karma therapies 
are used. The skin is washed with neem and vidahga 
as antiseptic wash externally to prevent and check 
the infection, and then paheha karma internally to 
help recovery. 

Dadru (ringworm): Plaster of mustard seeds, tur¬ 
meric, trikatu with yogurt/water (lassi) is applied to 
area affected by the ringworm. Internally, the same 
herbs, and, vidahga, neem, sarsaparilla, chakrama- 
rda, khadir, chitrak, ginger, triphald may be taken. In 
viral ringworm, baths with a decoction of the above 
herbs are also useful. 



Minor Skin Disorders: Drinking tepid decoctions 
of turmeric, mahjishtha, gokshura, triphald, 
bhrihgardj, gotu kola, sandalwood, aloe vera gel. 
Blisters can develop on the patches. After blisters 
burst, a plaster of turmeric, mahjishtha, vidahga, 
neem, hantakl, and aloe vera gel is applied to the 
s ki n. 

Foods are light and wholesome, mixed with ghee, 
and bitter leafy vegetables are advised. Herbs include 
trikatu and kaishore guggul. One simultaneously 
avoids eating sour foods, milk, yogurt, meat, cane, 
sugar and sesame seeds (except as remedies). Baths 
(i.e., soaking the problem skin) with herbs of musta 
and triphald are useful as well. 


Leukoderma (Shvitra) 

Pigmentation Loss/White Skin Patches 

Causes: It arises from the aggravation of Vayu, Pitta, 
Kapha, blood, muscle, and fat. Vayu forms are easi¬ 
est to heal, becoming increasingly more difficult to 
subdue, with fat as the most difficult to heal. Gener¬ 
ally it is caused by excesses of all three doshas, but 
sometimes it is caused by one or two doshas. 

Symptoms: 

Vayu: Dry, light red s kin 

Pitta: Coppery red, burning, and destroys the hair 
in the infected area. 

Kapha: White, thick, heavy, and itching skin. Blood, 
Muscle, Fat: These tissues have the same 
respective colors as the three doshas. 

Recovery: Symptoms of black hairs, mild skin 
patches; not joined, of recent onset, and not caused 
by burning fire can be healed. The remainder, includ¬ 
ing those found on the genitals, palms, soles, and lips 
are difficult or unable to be healed. 

Therapies: First oleation, then elimination therapies 
(depending on one’s strength) are suggested. After¬ 
wards, bdkuchi, mahjishtha, neem, turmeric, dmalakl, 












The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


niakoy, khadir, bilwa bark, and chakramarda are taken 
with cane sugar. Following this, persons sun bathe to 
cause purgation. This will cause thirst, for that thin 
gruel (peyd) is taken for 3 days. 

All therapies for skin disorders, are also useful for 
internal and external Leukoderma disorders 
(including bdkuchl and rock salt for external 
application). 

Pustule eruptions : When they occur on the 
Leukoderma are first punctured to remove the fluids. 
For the next 15 mornings one takes bdkuchl, 
mahjishthd, neem, turmeric, dmalakl, makoy, khadir, 
bilwa bark, and chakramarda. 

Varieties: The three forms, daruna, chdruna, and 
kildsa, are all caused by the simultaneous excess of 
all three doshas. When it is found in the blood, it is 
red; in the muscle it is coppery; and if in the fat, it is 
white. When it is in the blood, it is the mildest form; 
in the fat, it is the most serious. 

This disorder cannot be healed if patches are 
overlapping, several patches exist, red hair grows 
through the patches, and diseases last for several years. 

Leukoderma is caused by sinful acts in this life 
or previous lives; eating mutually contradictory foods, 
disrespect and lying to people and deities. 


Minor Ailments (Kshudrarogam) 

Causes: There are 44 forms of minor ailments. All 
the different writers give different views of this sec¬ 
tion. Thus, there is no generally accepted number of 
ailments or sequence of the diseases. 

Symptoms: 

Pimples and Swellings 

Ajagallikd: Vayu and Kapha—pimples that are shiny, 
knotty, painless, the same color as the surrounding 
skin, and is found in infants. 

Ydvd-prakshyd: Vayu and Kapha—barley-corn- 
shaped eruptions, very hard, thick in the middle, 

knotty, and con fi ned to the flesh. 


Andhalaii: Vayu and Kapha—pimples are dense, 
raised, slender at the top, in circular patches, exuding 
some pus. 

Vivritd: Pitta—pimples are the color of ripe figs; flat 
at the top, in circular patches, unbearable burning. 
Kachapikd: Vayu and Kapha—pimples are in groups 
of five or six; hard, raised, nodular, tortoise shell¬ 
shaped, appearing anywhere on the body. 

Valmlka: All three doshas —knotty, undurated, 
pimples that slowly develop on the soles and palm 
joints, neck and above the collar bone, ant hill shaped. 
Indra-vriddha: Vayu and Pitta—pimples on the skin, 
arranged circularly. 

Panasika: Kapha and Vayu—very painful pimples/ 
abscess in or around the ears. 

Pashana-Garddabha (mumps): Kapha and Vayu— 
slightly painful, non shifting, hard swelling, appearing 
on the jawbone joint. 

Jala-Garddabha: Pitta—thin, superficial swelling, 
shifts position, fever, burning, but does not form pus. 
[Some say when they are circular, raised, studded 
with pouches, red, painful, and caused by Vayu and 
Pitta.] 

Kakshd: Pitta—black, painful pimples on the back, 
sides and armpit area. 

Agni-Rohini: All three doshas —blisters around the 
waist, bursts the local flesh, fever, burning inside the 
affected area; this cannot be healed. (Some say death 
occurs seven, 10 or 15 days from its onset.) 
Chippam: Vayu and Pitta—fingernail flesh develops 
pain, burning and pus. 

Kunakham: Fingernails are rough, dry, black, due to 
being hit (e.g., with a hammer). 

Anusayi: Kapha—small swelling on the body, the 
same color as the skin, but is deep-seated, and forms 
pus in the deeper levels. 

Viddrika: All three doshas —gourd-shaped round, red 
swelling on the groin region; symptoms related to 
each respective dosha. 

Sharkardr-budam: Vayu and Kapha—flesh, veins, 
ligaments, and fat develop cysts that burst with a large 





























Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 21: Skin Disorders 


quantity of honey-like secretion. Excessive secretion 
creates excess Vayu, drying the area of the s ki n in 
the shape of many gravel-like pimples. Malodorous, 
multi colored secretion from the veins can develop. 
The veins may suddenly bleed. The three forms are 
eczema, psoriasis, and rakasa (dry erythema/ 
abnormal red skin due to irritation and dilation of 
capillaries), and have been previously discussed under 
Kushtas (Skin Disorders). 

Yauvana-pidaka or Mukhadushika (acne): Vayu and 
Kapha—thorny pimples on the face of young people, 
due to blood. 

Padmini-Kantakci (skin papilloma): Vayu and 
Kapha—circular, gray patches or rash-like pimples 
with thorny pimples, with itching. 

Jatumani (mole): Blood and Pitta—reddish, shiny, 
circular, painless, congenital, level with the s kin . 
Mashaka (lichen): Vayu—hard, painless, black, 
raised pimples on the s kin . 

Tilakalaka (freckles): Any of the doshas —painless 
black spots (sesame seed sized) on the skin (non 
elevated). Some call this Nilikam if it is black and 
arise anywhere but on the face. 

Nyacham: Painless, congenital, circular, white, or 
brown skin patches contained to small areas of the 
body. 

Charmakila (skin hypertrophy/non-tumorous 

enlargement): Discussed in the s ki n disorder section. 
Vyanga: Thin, circular, painless, brown patches or 
stains. Vayu becomes excessed due to anger, over 
exertion, and fatigue; associated with Pitta cause this 
disorder to appear on the face. (Some say it is due to 
absorption of blood by Vayu and Pitta). 

Romcintika (measles): Pitta and Kapha—when small 
emptions appear all over the body, along with fever, 
burning, anorexia, and excess salivation. Herbs to 
reduce Vayu, Kapha, and Pitta, are advised. 


blisters appear on the s ki n—on the whole body, or 
any part of it. Symptoms of blood and Pitta appear. 

Eight forms of small pox exist: Vayu, Pitta, 
Kapha, Vayu/Pitta, Vayu/Kapha, Pitta/Kapha, 
Tridosha, and blood. Conditions caused by one dosha 
are easily healed. Dual -dosha disorders are healed 
with difficulty. Tridosha conditions cannot be healed. 

Symptoms: 

Vayu: Headache, severe pain, fever, thirst, joint 
pain; pimples are black. 

Pitta: Fever, burning, pain, pus exudation, thirst; 
pimples are yellow or red. 

Kapha: Vomiting, loss of appetite, lassitude; 
pimples are itching, hard, white, with no pain. Pus 
forms very slowly. 

Vavu/Pitta: Severe pain. 

Vayu/Kapha: Itching, hardness, and tightness 

Pitta/Kapha: Itching, burning, fever, vomiting. 

Tridosha: Pimples have depressions at their center 
and elevated edges; are hard, little pus, burning 
sensation, redness, thirst, delusion, vomiting, fainting, 
pain, fever, delirium, chills, and stupor. 

Blood: Red pimples and symptoms of Pitta. No 
therapies exist for this condition. 


Masurika (chicken pox) 

Cause and Development: 

Overeating sour, salty, and alkaline foods, incom¬ 
patible foods, excess amounts of food, eating before 
the last meal is digested, excess fasting, eating con¬ 
taminated foods and liquids, malefic planetary influ¬ 
ences on certain communities of a country; all cause 
an excess of the doshas and bad blood. This devel¬ 
ops lentil-sized emptions all over the body. Five dosha 
forms exist, and 7 tissue (dhatu) forms exist. 


Vishphotaka (small pox) 

Causes and Development: Overeating hot, pungent 
and sour foods causes burning sensation during 
digestion. Any heat-increasing activity (e.g., 
sunbathing, summer heat) causes all three doshas to 
become excessed. The excessed doshas invade the 
skin, blood, muscles, and bones. Fever develops then 























The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Premonitory Symptoms : Fever, itching, pain all over 
the body, restlessness, giddiness, swelling and dis¬ 
colored skin, reddish eyes. 

Symptoms: 

Vayu: Black or crimson eruptions, rough, very 
painful, hard, slowly forming pus; joint pain, cough, 
shivering, restlessness, exhaustion, dry lips, throat, 
and tongue; loss of appetite. 

Pitta: Red, yellowish-white eruptions with severe 
burning and pain; quickly forming pus; diarrhea, pain 
all over the body, thirst, loss of appetite, mouth ulcers, 
red eyes, very high fevers, and great distress. 

Blood: Similar to Pitta conditions. 

Kapha: Watery discharge from the mouth nose and 
eyes; inactivity, headache, heaviness, nausea, loss of 
appetite, sleep, stupor, lassitude; white, soft large, 
itching eruptions that are slightly painful and slow to 
form pus. 

Tridosha: Blue eruptions, flat, broad (depressed in 
the center and elevated at the edges), very painful, 
slow to form pus, copious exuding of malodorous 
pus, throat obstruction, loss of appetite, body stiffness, 
delirium, and restlessness. This condition is difficult 
to heal. 

Localization Symptoms: 

Plasma/Skin (rasa/twak): Eruptions are like 
bubbles of water, exuding thin watery fluid upon 
pricking; symptoms of mildly increased doshas. 

In Blood (rakta): Red eruptions, quickly forming 
pus; thin skin, emptions bleed heavily when pricked; 
symptoms of medium-increased doshas. This 
condition is difficult to heal. 

Muscle (mcimsa): Hard, greasy emptions, quickly 
forming pus; thick skin, pain all over the body, thirst, 
itching, fever, and restlessness. 

Fat (medas): Eruptions are round, soft, slightly 
elevated, large, greasy, painful; high fever, delusion, 
restlessness, and distress. This is difficult to heal. 

Marrow (majjci): Small, flat, rough eruptions, 
slightly elevated or at skin level; severe delusion, pain, 
and restlessness. 

Bone ( asthi): Cutting pain in the vital organs (thus 
endangering life) and bone pain. 

Reproductive Fluid (shukra): Ripe, waxy, small, 


very painful eruptions; stiff body, restlessness, delu¬ 
sion, burning, toxicity. This is a life-threatening con¬ 
dition. 

Any of the above seven tissue conditions may also 
have one or more of the excessed dosha symptoms 
present. 

Easily Healed : Residing in the skin, caused by 
blood, Pitta or Kapha separately, or Kapha/Pitta. 

Difficult to Heal : Vayu, Vayu/Pitta, Vayu/ Kapha. 

Cannot be Healed : Tridosha whose symptoms 
include coral-colored emptions or colors of all three 
doshas. 

No herbal therapies are available when symptoms 
include hiccup, cough, frequent urination, high fever, 
severe delirium, restlessness, fainting, thirst, burning 
sensation, body curvatures, bleeding through mouth, 
nose or eyes; cooing, or difficulty breathing. Also for 
yellow or coppery pimples with pain, fever, burning 
all over the body, face, and inside the mouth. 


Herpes Zoster (Visarpa) 

Seven types of herpes exist: Vayu, Pitta, Kapha, 
Vayu/Pitta, Vayu/Kapha, Pitta/Kapha, Tridosha, and 
trauma. It is found externally, internally, or both. 
External herpes is easiest to heal. The intemal/extemal 
form is the most difficult to subdue. 

Cause and Development: Its development is identi¬ 
cal to edema. The doshas become aggravated due to 
their own causes, with the main development being 
the eating of salty, sour, pungent, and hot foods. Ag¬ 
gravated doshas quickly spread to all the internal parts 
(lymph, blood, s kin , and muscles). When excessed 
doshas are outside, they spread to all the external parts. 
When the doshas are excessed in both the inside and 
outside, they spread in all places. 













Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 21: Skin Disorders 


Inner herpes arises due to diseases of the vital 
organs (i.e., heart, head, urinary bladder, etc.), loss of 
consciousness, severe injury due to the sense organs, 
extreme thirst, sudden poor digestion, and physical 
weakness, forcing of the physical urges. Outer herpes 
arises from infections. 


Symptoms 

Vayu: Similar to Vayu fevers, and edema, pain that is 
throbbing, intermittent, piercing dilating, cutting, and 
tingling. 

Pitta: Similar to Pitta fevers, and is quick spreading, 
with red swelling, miscellaneous eruptions of small 
and medium size. 

Kapha: Similar to Kapha fevers, and itching, herpes 
are greasy. 

When herpes are not tended to, all forms of herpes 
develop eruptions with symptoms of each dosha, and 
eventually burst. This leads to ulcers with symptoms 
according to each dosha. 

Vayu/Pitta (Agni Herpes): Fever, vomiting, fainting, 
diarrhea, thirst, dizziness, splitting bone pain, poor 
digestion, blindness, loss of taste and appetite. 
Burning, blackish, blue, or red skin eruptions look as 
though burnt by fire, and spread quickly in a line 
diagonally along the torso from the left shoulder to 
the bottom right side of the chest (and around the 
back to the left shoulder (due to Vayu). This form of 
herpes attacks the vital organs, causing them severe 
pain, creates loss of consciousness and sleep, difficult 
breathing, and hiccup. At this stage, there is little 
comfort, difficulty moving, and a sort of coma-type 
of sleep. 

Vciyu/Kapha (Granthi Herpes): Vayu is obstructed 
by Kapha and breaks into many parts; or it vitiates 
the blood in the skin, veins, tendons, and muscles in 
persons with aggravated blood. This causes a chain 
of blood tumors that are either long, small, round, 
thick, or rough. It is associated with severe pain, fever, 
difficult breathing cough, diarrhea, dry mouth, hiccup, 
vomiting, dizziness, delusion, discoloration, fainting, 
cutting pain, and poor digestion. 

Pitta/Kapha (Kardama Herpes): Fever, stiffness, 
excess sleep, stupor, headache, physical debility, 
tremors, irrelevant speech, loss of taste or appetite, 
dizziness, fainting, poor digestion, splitting bone pain, 


severe thirst, heaviness, mucus in feces, excess toxic 
coating in the plasma channels. Generally, it begins 
in the stomach and then spreads elsewhere. Emptions 
are mildly painful, deep yellow, red, or yellowish- 
white, or black in color, and greasy. They can be dirty, 
swollen, heavy, undergoing ulceration from deep 
within; with excess heat and moisture in the muscles. 
Other symptoms include being slushy to the touch, 
exposed bundles of tendons and veins, gangrene, and 
foul odors. 

Tridosha: Symptoms of all three doshas 
simultaneously, quickly spreading to all the tissues. 
Kshataia (Trauma): Pitta and blood are aggravated 
producing herpes studded with boils. Other symptoms 
include fevers, severe swelling, pain, burning, and is 
blackish-red. 

Herpes caused by any one dosha, or by two doshas 
without secondary complications is easy to heal. 
Several causes of herpes make it difficult to heal, or 
cannot be healed. These causes include trauma, 
tridosha, invading the vital organs, loss of tendons, 
veins, and muscles; and those that are extremely moist 
and malodorous. 

Modern science associates these infectious 
diseases with erysipelas, cellulitis, herpes zoster, 
gangrene, eczema, some forms of dermatitis, and 
skin cancer. 


Therapies 

The following herbs are taken internally and 
applied externally as a poultice. 

Vayu and Pitta: Mahjishtha, chandan, sariva, neem 
Kapha: Daruharidra, turmeric, chop chini 
Dual and Tridosha: Combine the required herbs 
Trauma: Black pepper, chandan, mahjishtha, 
kakamachl 


Foot-Skin Disorders 

Padadarika: People who walk a lot find their soles 
becoming dry with painful cracks, caused by Vayu 
in the feet. 

















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Kadara (corns): Knotty painful, hard growth; raised 
in the middle or sunken around the sides; secretions, 
appearing at the soles and maybe palms, due to blood 
and fat in the palms or soles. It is due to external 
causes such as shoes, gravel, thorns etc. 

Alasa (athletes foot): Wetness (e.g., dampness, mud, 
etc.) causes burning, pains, itching, and secretions in 
between toes. 


Head-Skin Disorders 

Indralupta (balding), [also called Ruiya or Khdlitya 

(alopecia)l: Vayu and Pitta cause hair to fall from 
their roots. Blood and Kapha fill these pores, 
preventing fresh hair growth. 

Ddrunaka: The roots of the body hairs become hard, 
dry and itchy, caused by Kapha and Vayu. 
Arunshikd: Ulcers containing mucus and pus, and 
having many openings, appearing on the scalp due 
to parasites, blood, and Kapha in the scalp. 

Palitam (premature graying): Due to overworking, 
fatigue, stress, grief, anger, heat; Pitta become 
excessed and causes the hair to gray prematurely. 

Genitals-Skin Disorders 

Parivartikd (phimosis): Vydna Vayu becomes 
excessed due to masturbation; pressure or injury to 
the penis, forming a knot-l ik e structure or constriction 
to the foreskin, prevents it from drawing back to 
uncover the head of the penis. Symptoms include pain, 
burning, occasionally forming pus; when the knot 
hardens, it is caused by Kapha and is itchy. 
Avapdtikd (paraphimosis): It occurs in young girls 
before they develop menses or the rupture of the 
hymen. When the outer covering of the glans clitoridis 
(prepuce) is abnormally turned back through such 
conditions as excited coition or other forcible entry. 
Niruddha-prakasha: Vayu causes the foreskin to 
cover up the urethra orifice, preventing the release of 
urine, causing great pain. Partial closure causes a thin 
release of urine with some pain. 
Sanniruddha-guda or Niruddhaguda (narrow 

rectum): By obstructing the natural urge to pass stools, 
the rectum becomes clogged with feces, deranging 
Apdna Vayu. This causes constriction of the passage, 
resulting in difficulty in passing stools. This is very 
difficult to heal. 


Ahiputana: Itchy pimples around the anus of children 
are caused by not cleaning urine, perspiration, feces, 
etc. from their diaper. The eruptions are caused by 
deranged blood and Kapha, becoming eczema-like, 
and oozing a malodorous discharge with constant 
scratching. Eventually it spreads, and is difficult to 
heal. 

Vrishana-kachu: When persons do not wash their 
genitals, or do not dry them after washing, local 
perspiration causes itching and eczema, resulting in 
constant scratching. It is due to Kapha and blood. 
Gudci-Bhrcinsha (anus prolapse): In weak and thin 
persons, Vayu is excessed through straining or urging 
the passage of stools, or from dysentery. 

Therapies 

General: In all disorders, most of the external herbal 
therapies may also be taken internally to heal the cause 
of the imbalances. 

Aia-gallikd: Blood-letting with leeches when there 
is no pus formation and bursting of pimples; then, 
plasters of oyster shell powder or rhubarb. When pus 
and bursting pimples develop, ulcer therapies are used. 
[A Vayu/Kapha disorder] 

Yava-pmkhyd, Antrdlaii (Anhdlaji), Panasp Kachapi 

and Pdshdma-gardabha (mumps- non pus stages): 
Plastered with kushta, kut, lavan bhaksat; cedar, 
vamsha lochana, and ghee. When pus sets in, pimples 
are cut by incision and then ulcer therapies are used. 
Visphotaka (smallpox), Indra-vriddha, Kaksha, Jdla- 

gatrlabha, Irivelli, Gandhanamni, Gardabhi, and 

Vivritd: Therapies for the Pitta-form of Visarpa are 
used—lightening (see pahcha karma section), bitter 
herbs (e.g., chirdyatd, kutki, neem, aloe vera, gentian, 
barberry), blood-letting, and purgation are also used. 
Foods include barley and ghee with bald, lotus root, 
sandalwood, basmati rice, peas, lentils, green lentils, 
triphald, and pomegranates. Hot, burning spicy foods 
are to be avoided (e.g., onions, garlic, red peppers). It 
is also recommended to avoid nightshades (eggplants, 
potatoes, tomatoes, peaches, strawberries), naps, 
anger, exercise, sun, fire and wind. 

Externally, ghee cooked with bitter herbs and 
sandalwood are applied to pimples when pus forms 
or bursts. 




























Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 21: Skin Disorders 


Chippam andKuncikham: First, washing the affected 
area with hot water is required, and the pus drained 
by cutting with a knife. Then, medicated oil is applied 
to the area using coriander, neem, sandalwood, aloe, 
turmeric, manjishtha, onion, black pepper, rhubarb, 
and ghee in a sunflower oil decoction. 

Vicldrikd: First, oil and fomentation are used; then, 
the area is rubbed with the fingers. A plaster of bilwa, 
gambhari bark, peyu padal bark, archu, and shyonaka 
are applied to the swelling. The toxic blood is let out 
by scarification or leech/blood-letting. This is 
followed by applying a plaster of musta, manjishtha, 
turmeric, rose petals, neem, sarsaparilla, bhrihgardj, 
gotu kola, and sandalwood in sunflower or coconut 
oil. As soon as it becomes ulcerated, alterative and 
disinfecting therapies including musta, manjishtha, 
turmeric, bhrihgardj, gotu kola, sandalwood, 
bibhitakl, golden seal, neem , guggul, burdock, and 
gotu kola in sunflower or coconut oil are used. When 
ulcers are fully manifested, lancing followed by 
plastering with guduchl, ghee, and sesame oil, and 
then bandaging are required. The ulcer is washed 
frequently with antibiotic and antiseptic herbs like 
echinacea, golden seal, turmeric, neem, guggul, 
bibhitakl, gotu kola, manjishtha, and sarsaparilla. 
Sharkarar-buda: This is treated l ik e Kapha tumors 
(see Chapter 22), [or eczema, psoriasis, and rakasd; 
three diseases discussed under kushtaj. 

Kachu, Vicharchikd, Pdmd: These disorders are 
treated like obstinate s ki n diseases. A paste of white 
mustard seeds, calamus, turmeric, or an oil decoction 
of katuka, aloe vera gel, manjishtha, neem, or 
sandalwood is applied to the affected skin area. 
Pdcla-cldrikd: The vein affecting the disorder is 
opened, and the troubled area is treated with sesame 
oil or ghee, manjishtha, sarsaparilla, and musk. 
Alasa (athletes foot): A plaster of sesame, neem, 
haritaki, and kantkdri is applied to the affected parts. 
Blood-letting is also useful. In less serious cases, only 
sandalwood powder need be applied to the area. 
Kadara (corns): The corns are scraped off with a knife 
and cauterized by applying heated sesame oil. 
Indra-lupta (balding): The bald area is oiled and fo¬ 
mented; then, constantly scraped and covered with a 
paste of black pepper, chitrak, cedar, kanei; wild lico¬ 
rice, Spanish jasmine, and tagar (Ceylon jasmine). 
Internally, bhrihgardj, gotu kola, amalaki, chitrak, 


and shatdvari are useful. 

Arunshikd: The affected scalp area undergoes blood¬ 
letting (by venesection or with leeches), then a neem 
decoction is poured over it. Next plasters are applied 
using herbs l ik e turmeric, neem, licorice, and castor 
oil. 

Ddrunaka: Oil and foment the diseased hair roots. 
Then, herbs are applied (and ingested) that reduce 
Kapha and Vayu, such as turmeric, pippali, 
ashwagandha, khadir, kdkoli, and ginger. 

Palitam (premature graying): An oil decoction of 
bhrihgardj, triphald, manjishtha, and licorice are used 
as nasal oil, head oil, and face oil to help cure bald¬ 
ness, wrinkles, and improve sensory organs. 
Masurikd and Romdntikd: Therapies for visarpa are 
used. Also helpful is internal and external use of 
turmeric, manjishtha, sandalwood, aloe vera gel, 
bhrihgardj, gotu kola, musta, guggul, and haritaki. 
Jatumani (moles). Mashaka (lichen). Tila-kdlaka 

(freckles): The areas are scraped with a knife, then 
gradually cauterized with alkali when superficial, and 
with heat when deep seated. 

Nyacha, Vyahga. Nilikd: Opening of local veins in 
the temporal region, etc. is useful. Then, the areas 
involved with the disorder are rubbed with plaster of 
bald, licorice, atibald, bhumidmalaki, kshira kdkoli, 
bark, with milk, honey, or ghee. 




























The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Charak’s therapy for Vyanga is turmeric, 
mahjishthd, calamus, red and white sandalwood, and 
lotus filaments; pasted together with milk and ghee, 
and cooked. This helps remove wrinkles, tans, specks, 
moles, pimples, and improves the complexion. 
Yuvana-Pidaka (acne): Emetics are useful therapies. 
Herbs are ingested and applied to the face, include 
sandalwood, manjishthci, lodhra, calamus, and white 
mustard seeds. Turmeric creme is also good to apply 
topically. 

Paclmini-Kantaka: A neem , ghee and honey decoc¬ 
tion is taken as an emetic and is also applied to the 
diseased area. 

Parivartikd (turned-back foreskin): Ghee is rubbed 
on the area and fomented, and plasters are applied 
for 3 to 5 days. Then, after lubricating the area with 
ghee, the glans penis is gently pressed and the fore¬ 
skin is smoothly drawn over the head, entirely cover¬ 
ing it. Lastly, the fores ki n is fomented with warm 
poultices; Vayu-reducing foods, including ghee and 
sesame oil are ingested. Poultices are made from bar¬ 
berry, wheat flour, onion, and cane sugar. They are 
made into a decoction and used as an ointment. 
Avapdtikd (paraphimosis): The same therapy is used 
for girls, as above. 

Nirudclha-Prakasha (urethra blockage): A tube that 
is open at both ends is lubricated with ghee and gen¬ 
tly entered into the urethra. Ghee and sesame oil, 
mixed with Vayu-reducing herbs such as shatavan, 
licorice, bald, etc., are sprinkled over (or poured into) 
the area as a decoction or plaster. Every third day, 
thicker tubes are placed in the urethra. In this way 
the urethra passage is made to dilate. Emollient foods 
are eaten to help heal the condition. 

The dosha causing the below three disorders is 
first determined; remembering that these disorders 
cannot be healed. However, they may be controlled. 


Agni-Rohini: This is treated l ik e visarpa (see visarpa 
section). 

Sanniruddha-Guda (narrowedrectum): This disorder 
is treated like niruddha-prakasha (urethrablockage). 
Valmrka: This is treated as abscesses. Surgical 
procedures involve scraping off diseased patches, and 
cauterizing them with alkali or fire. Afterwards, 
purifying and healing the area is similar to tumors. If 
the disorder is not on a marma point (see marmas in 
Chapter 7), and not very large, purgatives, emetics, 
and enemas (depending upon the dosha involved), 
followed by venesection, are used for purification. 
Plaster of guduchl, kalaparni, arakvadam, black salt, 
sesames seed paste, ghee, horscgram ( kulattha), and 
barley flour is applied. When pus is involved, a 
poultice with the same ingredients is applied at a 
lukewarm temperature. When the pus is at its zenith, 
they are opened with a knife, cauterized, cleansed, 
and thenrecauterized with an alkali (bhasin kchhar). 
Healing therapies are next used, including neem oil 
cooked with cardamom, red sandalwood, mahjishthd, 
khadir, and sarsaparilla. For symptoms appearing on 
the hands or feet, with complications of swelling and 
many cavities, no therapies exist. 

Ahi-putand, Vrishana-Kachu: When infants contract 
these diseases, first the mother’s breast-milk is 
purified (see female reproductive section). The area 
affected is washed with triphald ghee. Then, a paste 
of rock salt is applied. Sandalwood powder is 
frequently used to keep the area dry. 

Guda-Bhransha (prolapsed anus): The protruding 
part is fomented and lubricated with ghee, then gently 
reinserted. Next, it is bandaged, leaving a small 
opening directly under the anus for passage of stools. 
The anus is frequently fomented; boiled milk with 
ghee, shatdvarl, cardamom, bald, cinnamon, and 
guggul arc taken as drink. It is said that even the most 
difficult prolapses can be normal iz ed by this measure. 
















Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 21: Skin Disorders 


Subcutaneous Layers 


























The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 




J MjdxrLcmljcjCLL § 7 It-IlLIlA- 























Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 22: Abnormal Growths/Neoplasm 


For an intelligent person, the whole world is a teacher, 
so one should imitate the world after carefully considering 
their meaning and effects of such actions 

Ashtanga Hridayam Su. Ch. 2: ver. 45 


Chapter 22 

Abnormal Growths/Neoplasm 
Scrotum, Hernia, Fistula, Elephantiasis, Tumors, Cancer 


Enlarged Scrotum (Vriddhi) 

/ N auses: When Vayu becomes aggravated 

owing to obstructed movement, it begins 
to move from the groin to the scrotum. This 
produces swelling and pain, then a pulling down¬ 
ward, and finally a swelling of the blood vessels. 
There are seven origins of this disease: Vayu, Pitta, 
Kapha, blood, fat, urine, and intestines. Enlarge¬ 
ments related to urine and the intestines are caused 
by Vayu; however, these are separately categorized 
according to the organs involved. Bradhna is the 
swelling of the scrotal region caused by any of the 
doshas. 

Symptoms: 

Vayu: Scrotum looks like a leather bag filled with 
air; is dry and painful. 

Pitta: Scrotum is brownish-red and small, with 
burning, heat and the forming and discharg¬ 
ing of pus. 

Kapha: Scrotum is heavy, cold, oily, itching, hard, 
with slight pain. 

Blood: Scrotum is studded with black boils 

and has other Pitta symptoms. 

Fat: Soft, swollen scrotum, which is large, 
blackish-blue, oily, and hard to the touch. 


Inguinal Hernia (Antraja Vriddhi) 

Causes: Eating Vayu-increasing foods, bathing in 
cold water, suppressing Vayu, or premature release 
of urges (e.g., urine, feces), carrying heavy loads, 
walking long distances, improper movements of the 
body. All these increase Vayu and pull down the weak¬ 
ened small intestine, producing an inguinal hernia. If 
the hernia is neglected, the small intestine then drops 
into the scrotum, causing swelling. Vayu then causes 
an enlarged scrotum with gas, abdominal pain, and 
rigidity. Hiatal hernias occur near the navel, usually 
in weak children. 

Symptoms: Scrotal pain, hollow sounding, re¬ 
cedes but comes back again on the release of pres¬ 
sure. It has all the symptoms of Vayu vriddhi. 

Swelling Therapies 

Purgation, massage, medicated enema (niruha), 
neem paste applied externally to the swelling. Rec¬ 
ommended herbs to be taken internally include neem, 
turmeric, mahjishtha, and guggul. For all swellings 
caused by Kapha, the swellings should be cut and 
cleansed first. 


Fluid in Scrotum 
Hydrocele (Mutra Vriddhi) 

By habitual suppression of urine, the scrotum re¬ 
sembles a leather bag filled with water. It is painful, 
soft, with round rings underneath, and is accompa¬ 
nied by difficult urination. 


Fistula-in-Ano (Bhagandara) 

[Anal abscesses on the sides of anus] 

A pimple develops on either side of the anus within 
a 1 i/ 2 inch radius. It is painful and exudes. There are 
5 forms of this condition: Causes: 

1. Vayu (shatapondka): Eating foods that are astrin- 










The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


gent and dry causes excess Vayu that produces an 
anus pimple (papule). If neglect, the pimple devel¬ 
ops pus, then bursts, creating many small ulcers. 
Urine, feces, and semen may come out frothy, crim¬ 
son colored, and painfully. 

2. Pitta ( ushtrashirodara): Excessed Pitta causes 
red pimples in the anal region that quickly develop 
pus. When the pus discharges it is hot and malodorous. 

3. Kapha (parisravl): Itching, thick oozing, hard, 
slightly painful, white colored. 

4. Tridosha (shambiikavarta): Different colored 
pimples, oozes, looks like cows hoofs, and is spiral 
(like a seashell). 

5. External Causes (unmargi): Minor injury (such 
as one caused by thorns) at the anus will lead to sinus 
formation if neglected. Later, small ulcers form. 

Pitta/Kapha-reducing therapies are suggested. 

Therapies 

Therapies appropriate for each respective dosha 
are required. Purgation, probing, cleansing the site, 
cutting, cauterizing with oil, and suturing with alkaline 
thread. 

Shllpada (Filariasis/Elephantiasis) 

Madhavakara, author of the Madhava Nidanam 
defines this disease as a parasitic woim infestation in 
the tissues. If neglected it develops into elephantiasis. 
This condition is generally prevalent in areas where 
water stagnates for a long time and remains 
continually cold. 

Cause and Development: Deranged muscle, blood, 
and Kapha causes swelling of the calves and lower 
legs, beginning in the front of the leg. 

Symptoms: Swelling of the groin, gradually 
involving the legs, lips, nose, neck, ears, and hands. 
It is accompanied by fever and severe pain. 

Vayu: Black, rough swelling, cracks, or ulcers 
between the skin and mucus membrane, severe pain, 
and fever without apparent cause. 

Pitta: Yellow-colored, swelling, burning sensation, 
soft to the touch, fever. 

Kapha: White, smooth, heavy, and hard swelling 


Therapies 

Swellings that grow upwards (like an anthill) with 
many sprouts; swellings that have grown for over 1 
year, and swellings that are very large, with conditions 
that are caused by food and life-style habits that 
increase Kapha. In Kapha doshas, when swellings 
have exudation, when severe itching is present or 
when all symptoms are present should not be treated. 

Therapies that reduce the appropriate dosha are 
advised. Antiparasitical and antiworm herbs are also 
useful (e.g., kutaj, vidahga —see Chapter 15). 
Mustard paste is applied over the swelling (except in 
Pitta conditions). 


Abdominal Tumors (Gulma) 

General Causes: There are 8 types of gulma: Vayu, 
Pitta, Kapha, Vayu/Pitta, Vayu/Kapha, Pitta/Kapha, 
Tridosha, and (in women only), tumors related to 
menstrual blood/ovum. 

These occur when weak from fever, vomiting, 
diarrhea, and other debilitating diseases, or from 
excessive or improper therapies of emesis, purgation, 
and enema; eating an excess of Vayu increasing foods; 
drinking cold water when hungry. Other causes 
include excess jumping, swimming, or other 
strenuous activities just after eating; forcing vomiting, 
suppressing the natural urges (e.g., passing gas and 
urination), undergoing purificatory therapies without 
oleation and sudation, not following the 
recommended eating and lifestyle habits after pahcha 
karma (purificatory therapies). 

From these conditions the doshas, with Vayu 
predominant, become increased individually or in 
combination (two or three doshas or with blood), 
invade the alimentary tract, spreading both upward 
and downward, causing abdominal pain, and then a 
perceivable, elevated, hard mass (tumor). 









Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 22: Abnormal Growths/Neoplasm 


General Premonitory Signs: Loss of appetite, poor, 
irregular digestion, indigestion, anorexia, vomiting, 
loss of natural urges, colic, intestinal gurgling, hair 
standing on end, belching. 

Vavu Tumors: For Vayu doshas or others who have 
been greatly emaciated by fever, emesis, purgation, 
or diarrhea; tumors are caused by eating an excess of 
Vayu-increasing foods, cold food, drink and habits, 
non-oily emetic or purgative therapies, forcing 
vomiting, suppressing the urges to pass gas, urine, 
and stool, excessively drinking water after heavy food, 
excess bumpy travel, excess amounts of sex, exercise, 
drinking, anxiety; accidents, irregular postures during 
sitting, sleeping, standing, or walking. 

Premonitory Signs : Excessive belching, constipation, 
gruesome feeling of contentment, intolerance, 
intestinal gurgling, air moving in the intestines, gas, 
poor digestion. 

Vavu Causes: These tumors are caused by weakness 
from tissue depletion or loss in the colon, passage 
obstruction by Kapha, feces, or Pitta. Vayu becomes 
aggravated, localized in the alimentary tract, and 
forms into a hard mass by causing dryness. The tumor 
is called primary if it develops in the colon (the 
primary site of its origin), and secondary if it develops 
in the small intestine or stomach. Secondary tumors 
have branches or cause similar kinds of growth at a 
distant organ or area (metastasis). Usually, these 
tumors are found in the urinary bladder, navel, heart, 
or rib area. 

Vavu Pathology: Aggravated Vayu enters the 
alimentary tract or maha srotas, causing it to become 
dry and hard. Vayu then relocates and manifests in 
the heart, bladder, sides of the chest or navel area. It 
causes colic and nodules. 

Vavu Symptoms: Tumors change in size and intensity 
of pain—alternating between experiencing and not 
experiencing piercing and throbbing, expansion and 
contraction, numbness and hair standing on end. 
There may be a feeling of ants crawling on one’s 
limbs, afternoon fever, dry mouth, difficult breathing, 
and hair standing on end at the onset of pain. 


One experiences pain in the sides of the neck, 
headache, fever, enlarged spleen, gurgling intestinal 
sound, pricking pain, constipation, difficulty 
breathing, stiff body, dry mouth, emaciation, irregular 
digestion, dry, black skin, nails, eyes, urine, and feces; 
its shape is indefinite, found in various places, changes 
location, and size. The nature of pain may range from 
throbbing and cutting pain to a feeling that the tumor 
is being swarmed by ants. 

Vavu Complications: These include spleen problems, 
intestinal gurgling, poor digestion, malaise, head pain, 
swollen lymph glands of the groin, black, red or rough 
skin, nails, eyes, feces, urine, and stool; hardening of 
the alimentary tract. 

Vavu Tumor Therapies: 

1. Oleation is first administered through foods, 
massage, drinks, and niruha and anuvdsana 
medicated enemas (see Chapter 7). 

a. Oily drinks are especially useful for tumors above 
the navel area. 

b. Both enemas are used for tumors in the colon or 
abdomen. 

c. When there are also obstructions blocking gas 
and stool, oily, hot, and nourishing foods and liquids 
are taken (after the digestion is improved). 

Medicated ghee and sesame oil are suggested for 
drinking, for massage, and both forms of medicated 
enemas. They are taken very frequently (ensuring that 
Pitta and Kapha do not become aggravated). 
Medicated ghee includes boiled herbs of ginger, bald, 
katukd, vidahga, and triphald. Should Pitta, Kapha, 
or blood become excessed, then standard therapies 
to reduce these doshas are applied, ensuring Vayu 
does not become further deranged. 















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Ingesting ghee boiled with the herbs of triphala, 
coriander, vidahga, chitrak, and milk (4 times the 
amount of the ghee) heals Vayu tumors. A decoction 
of dashmul may be added to increase the efficacy of 
therapy. Hihgwastdk paste, coriander, chitrak, cala¬ 
mus, cardamom, and yogurt boiled in ghee alleviates 
colic pain, and abdominal distention. 

Alternatively, shildjit (mineral pitch) with 
dashmul and barley is another way to heal tumors. 

2) Fomentation therapy is next used to soften the 
circulatory channels, reduce excess Vayu, colic pain, 
abdominal distention, and constipation, which results 
in healing the tumor. 

If Vayu tumors are not healed by the above thera¬ 
pies, then blood-letting will heal the illness. 

Pitta Tumors 

Pitta Causes: Pitta becomes deranged along with Vayu 
in persons emaciated from fever, emesis, purgation, 
or diarrhea. This is caused by excess hot or burning 
foods (i.e., salty, pungent, sour, alkaline, sharp, and 
fermented), old wine, salads, eating before digesting 
the previous meal, emesis with a dry stomach, ha¬ 
bitually suppressing natural urges, excessive sun, and 
wind exposure. 

Pitta Pathology: Deranged Vayu manifests in the 
stomach and small intestine, producing similar pains 
as in Vayu tumors. Traveling through the raktavaha 
srota (blood/circulatory system) produces burning in 
the areas of the pelvis, heart, chest, and throat as a 
result of vitiated Pitta. This causes sour burps with 
smoke, burning sensation in tumor with pain, sweat¬ 
ing, soft, loose, tender, or with slight raising of the 
hair in this region. 

Pitta Symptoms: Persons experience acidity, faint¬ 
ing, diarrhea, sweating, thirst, fever, green or deep 
yellow skin, nails, eyes, urine, and feces; tender to 
the touch and burning, giddiness, throbbing pain, dry 
throat, palate, and mouth. 

Pitta Tumor Therapies: 

1) When caused by oily and hot foods, laxatives 
lik e rhubarb or senna are used. 


ghee is useful. 

3) When the Pitta tumor is in the colon, an enema 
is given with bitter herbs and milk; or a purgative 
with lukewarm milk boiled with bitter herbs and ghee 
(if there is strong digestion and physical strength). 

4) If the illness is associated with thirst, fever, 
excessive burning, colic pain, sweating, weak 
digestion, and anorexia, then blood-letting is 
employed. To restore strength after blood-letting, 
nourishing soups with ghee and sesame oil are used. 

5) Pus-Free Tumors (apakva): A tumor that has 
not developed pus will be heavy, hard, fixed, raised, 
and located deep in muscle tissue without causing a 
change in skin color. 

6) Pus-Forming Tumors (pachya-mana): One 
experiences a burning sensation, fever, colic, and 
sawing pain; irritation, insomnia, general distaste for 
things. Hot medicated oils (e.g., sunflower oil with 
brdhmi, turmeric, and cardamom) are used to heal 
this type of tumor. 

7) Pus Tumors: When the Pitta tumor is also 
associated with vitiated blood (rakta) and Pitta, the 
tumor may develop pus. Surgery is required for Pitta 
tumors. 

Symptoms of external tumors that are suppurated 
include the exfoliation of skin, protrusion, grayish 
color with a red outline, feeling that it is full of water. 
After pressing down on the tumor, it immediately rises 
to its original position; pain occurs when the sides of 
the tumor are pressed together. 

When the tumors are internal or there is swelling 
in the region of the heart, signs and symptoms are 
the same. External tumors will protrude towards the 
sides of the abdomen. 

The ancient Ayurvedic physician, Sushrut and the 
ancient author Atreya (Charak) have delineated 
between pus-filled and non-pus-filled tumors. Sushrut 
stated that tumors do not develop pus, whereas Atreya 
notes that pus develops in tumors embedded in the 
tissues, creating abscesses. Being an experienced 
surgeon, Sushrut refers to the neoplastic growths, 
whereas Charak refers only to infectious swellings. 


2) When caused by dry and hot foods, ingesting 










Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 22: Abnormal Growths/Neoplasm 


Some scholars differentiate between internal and 
external tumors. All tumors develop in the 
gastrointestinal tract. Should they develop pus there, 
they are called internal tumors. If the tumors rise to 
the surface and then develop pus, they are called 
external tumors. 

Self-Healing Pus Tumors: When this tumor has 
softened the passageway, it moves up or down 
(interior tumors), that is, the aggravated doshas are 
eliminating their excesses without need of therapy. 
At these times, persons need not resort to herbal or 
surgical therapies, but focus only on the proper diet 
for 10 to 12 days. Afterwards, more ghee is taken to 
help eliminate the doshas. When the doshas have 
regained balance (excesses are eliminated), persons 
ingest ghee boiled with bitter herbs and raw honey. 

To reduce the burning sensations of Pitta tumors, 
the tumor is massaged using sandalwood oil or ghee 

Kapha Tumors: 

Cause: Kapha tumors (with Vayu) occur in emaci¬ 
ated persons from fevers, diarrhea, excess or improper 
emesis or purgation. They result from overeating, 
excessive eating of oily, heavy, sweet, and cold foods; 
overindulging in pastries, sugar, milk, sesame seeds, 
candy, salads, animal products; excessive amounts 
of immature yogurt and wine, suppressing natural 
urges, drinking too much water when not thirsty, and 
physical trauma. 


specific to the dosha involved. 

Kapha Tumor Therapies: 

1) Tumors caused by ingesting cold, heavy, and 
oily foods require fasting if one is not strong enough 
for emetics (vomiting) and has weak digestion. 

2) With poor digestion, minimal pain, heaviness, 
sluggish gastrointestinal tract, nausea, and anorexia, 
emetics are advised. 

3) After emetics and fasting, persons are counseled 
to eat hot, pungent, and bitter foods and herbs. When 
digestive strength is restored from these three 
therapies, persons take ghee boiled with laxatives and 
pungents, such as triphalci and pippall respectively. 

4) For tumors that are hard and raised, 
accompanied with distention and constipation, 
fomentation is first used; later the tumor is massaged 
to help dissolve it. 

5) When the tumor becomes dislodged from its 
manifestation site, purgatives, such as castor oil, are 
suggested. Oil or dashmul enemas may also be used. 

6) Once the GI tract is well oiled, if pus is in the 
tumor and one experiences weakened digestion or 
retention of wind, then herbal powders or decoctions 
are used to relieve these conditions. Herbs include 
triphala, cardamom, and coriander to remove gas; 
and pippall for strengthening the digestion. 

Should the tumor be well-rooted, large, hard, 
immovable, and heavy, then persons are given 
laxatives, medicated herbal wines (arishtas), and 
cauterization. 


Kapha Symptoms: This causes the excessed Vayu to 
settle and develop in the stomach and small intes¬ 
tines, producing pains similar to that experienced with 
Vayu tumors. Excessed Kapha then causes fevers that 
start as a cold, anorexia, indigestion, malaise, hair 
standing on end, and heart disease. Other initial symp¬ 
toms include vomiting, oversleeping, laziness, tim¬ 
idness, heaviness and pain in the head, loss of taste 
or appetite, weakness, and fibroids. Tumors remain 
stationary (i.e., not moving), heavy, hard, deep seated, 
with numbness. When the tumor is overly aggravated, 
one experiences cough, difficult breathing, mucus, 
TB, whitish skin, nails, eyes, urine and feces. 

Tumors caused from each dosha generally 
develop in their original site and produce pain at times 


Laxatives are repeated every 1 to 3 days to develop 
physical strength. Kapha purgatives are taken at 
double the strength used by Vayu doshas. Arishtas 
(medicated herbal wines) are used to improve 
digestion, remove anorexia, and clear the circulatory 
channels. Cauterization is used if all of the above 
therapies prove ineffective. Cauterization is useful for 
both Kapha and Vayu tumors. For Kapha tumors, 
surgery is recommended. 













The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Dual and Tridosha: Symptoms are of both doshas or 
all three doshas. Tridosha tumors also provoke severe 
pain, burning, quickly forming and secreting pus, 
hardness, and greatly elevated tumors. Tri dosha 
tumors cannot be healed. 

Vayu/Kapha Therapies (Dvandvaja Tumors): 

1) Symptoms include poor digestion, anorexia, 
nausea, heaviness, and drowsiness. The main therapy 
is emetics (vamana). [See Chapter 7] 

2) With colic pain, abdominal distention, and 
constipation, suppositories are useful, along with 
herbs that reduce Vayu and Kapha (e.g., triphald, 
ginger, and cardamom). 

Vavu/Pitta Therapies: If Vayu tumors develop Pitta 
complications with fever and burning sensations, then 
mild purgation (so as not to aggravate Vayu), such as 
castor oil (2 teaspoons in one cup of hot water before 
bed), is useful to help stimulate downward moving 
air (Apdna Vayu). 

Dual/Tridoshic Therapies: The above mentioned 
therapies for the appropriate doshas are practiced. 

Medicated enemas are the best for healing tumors. 
It balances Vayu in the site of origin, thereby 
removing the cause of the tumor, and eventually, the 
tumor itself. Both niruha (non-oil-based) and 
anuvdsana (oil-based) medicated enemas are 
frequently used to heal tumors for Vayu, Pitta, and 
Kapha tumors. 

After undergoing fasting for any of the three 
doshas experiencing undigested toxins (dma), thick 
barley gruel and herbal soup is eaten. 


Blood (Raktaja Gulma) (Uterine/ova¬ 
rian tumors and cysts) 

Causes: These conditions develops during a 
woman’s menstrual period, soon after delivery (or 
miscarriage), with uterine or vaginal diseases, and 
from partaking in Vayu-increasing foods and life¬ 
styles (e.g., fear, worry) immediately after delivery 
or menstrual period. Other causes include fasting 
during menstmation or pregnancy and suppressing 
natural urges. These activities aggravate Vayu, 
causing it to enter the cervix and obstruct the monthly 
menstrual blood in the uterus. [Blood tumors occur 
in men only if there is vitiation of the blood; see 
Chapter 13.] 

symptoms (i.e., nausea, longings, breast-milk 
disorders, emaciation, distention), colic, diarrhea, 
anorexia, cough, malaise, oversleeping, laziness, 
timidity, excessive salivation, fainting, darkening of 
the lips and breasts, eye strain, swollen feet, growth 
of small hairs, and pulsation of round tumors (usually 
during pregnancy only a portion of the fetus pulsates). 
Gradually the blood, associated with Vayu and Pitta, 
cause symptoms of pain, stiffness, burning, diarrhea, 
thirst, fever, severe uterine pain (from accumulated 
vitiated blood), oozing, foul smell, and tearing and 
pulsating pain in the vagina. Sometimes the tumor 
moves around the uterus causing pain, but only the 
tumor grows (i.e., not the abdominal cavity, as in 
pregnancy). These tumors are treated only after a span 
of 10 months. 

Tumors grow and seep pus after a long time, or 
not at all, because they are caused by doshas. 
Abscesses quickly grow and seep pus because they 


are caused by vitiated blood. 


Anti-tumor Herbs for Specific Conditions 

All Tumors: Mahjishthd, guggul, aloe, kushtha, 
haritaki, bald, mamird, neem , garlic, and lav an 
bhaskar mixture. 

Abdominal Tumors: Pippall 
Glandular Tumors: Yellow dock 
Brain Tumors: Brdhml 
Breast Tumors: Musta 

TB Tumors: Kahchanar bark with ginger paste 
Vayu Tumors: Pashana Bedha 

















Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 22: Abnormal Growths/Neoplasm 


Tumors in the alimentary tract cause pain in the 
urinary bladder, upper abdomen, heart, and spleen; 
weaken digestive activity; cause loss of complexion 
and strength, and urinary and gaseous retention, and 
constipation and restraint of other natural urges. 
Tumors in the abdominal organs and outside the 
alimentary tract cause the opposite symptoms (i.e., 
mild pain, discoloration at the tumor site and greater 
outward growth). 

Blood Tumor Therapies: After 10 months of this 
illness, one undergoes oleation (oil), fomentation 
(sweat), and purgation with oily ingredients (sneha 
virechana). See Chapter 7. 

To dissolve the blood tumor, the powder of 
clerodendron siphonanthus (bhargi), ghee, jaggery, 
pippali, pippali root, devdaru, and trikatu are eaten 
with a decoction of sesame plant stems. Another 
excellent herb for this condition is ashoka. 

Gas (Andha): Due to obstructed upward and 
downward Vayu, severe abdominal pain with 
gurgling, great enlarged abdomen occurs. 

Ashthila and Pratyd-shthila: Raised, hard stone-l ik e 
tumors with gas are called ashthila. When these 
tumors are elevated sideways they are called 
pratydshthila. Tumor (gulma) therapies are followed. 

Tuoni and Prati-tuni: Vayu-causing severe radiating 
pain from the colon to the rectum and urethral passage 
is called tuni. When the pain radiates in the reverse 
direction it is called pratituni. Pippali and hihg are 
taken with ghee. Medicated enemas are also indicated. 


Cancer (Arbuda) 

Causes: Ayurveda sees cancer as an emotional dis¬ 
ease. Usually persons who feel a lack of meaning or 
purpose in life are afraid or unaware of what to do 
with their lives. These people develop something in¬ 
ternally instead of creating something meaningful in 
their lives. Another view is that the aura is disrupted, 
allowing negative astral forces to enter the body. Can¬ 
cer may be caused by environmental pollution, junk 
food, lethargy, lack of spiritual purpose, suppressed 
emotions or stagnation. Past-life karma also plays a 
role in this disease. Therefore, beyond physical heal¬ 
ing, emotional healing requires meditation and psy¬ 
chic cleansing. 

Although one humor is the main cause of a cancer, 
there are usually imbalances of all three doshas. Poor 
digestion allows for a buildup of toxins in the body. 
Downward moving air (Apdna Vayu) excesses 
develop negative life-force, which may mean that 
distention, constipation, and diarrhea may be the first 
physical causes of cancer. There is also a lack of 
oxygen (prana) in the cells. Brain tumors are mainly 
Kapha, secondarily Pitta. 

Symptoms: 

Vayu: Fear, anxiety, depression, and insomnia; dry, 
hard tumors of varying size, gray or brown 
complexion, distention, constipation, and other Vayu 
diseases. Colon cancer is usually a form of Vayu 
cancer. 

Pitta : Anger, impatience, irritability, hatred, 
resentment, inflamed, infected burning or bleeding 
tumors. Skin, eye, and liver cancers are usually Pitta- 
related. 



Kapha: Tumors are caused by any of the 
constitutions, but more often found in Kapha doshas. 
Symptoms include fatigue, excess sleeping, 
congestion, and salivation. First tumors are usually 
benign (not hard or well-defined to the touch) and 
are accumulations of mucus or subcutaneous fat; 
swollen, with dampness, and congestion. Later, they 
may turn malignant. Hot and bitter herbs help reduce 
fat, such as ginger, black pepper, turmeric, and katuka 
and barberry. 
















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Trikatu, triphala, and honey is a useful 
combination. Tumor-reducing herbs include saffron, 
turmeric, safflower, dandelion. Surgery is useful if 
cancer is found early enough. Lung or breast cancer 
is usually Kapha-related. 

Blood (Raktarbuda): Excessed doshas invade the 
blood, causing large, exuding muscle tumors that are 
studded, fast-growing, and discharge large amounts 
of blood. This condition causes anemia to develop 
resulting from the loss of blood. 

Muscle (Mamsarbuda): External blows to the body 
can derange the muscle tissue, causing painless, 
smooth, stone-like, and s ki n-colored tumors on the 
s ki n. These more commonly occur among non¬ 
vegetarians, and cannot be healed. 

Any cancer tumor that heavily exudes, develops 
on vital organs or channels, and those that are 
immovable, cannot be healed. 

Adhyarbuda: A secondary cancer developing from 
the first cancer. This cannot be healed. 

Dvirarbuda: A secondary cancer developing 
simultaneously with the first cancer. This cannot be 
healed. 

Therapies: 

General Overview: 

4 Step Cancer Healing Process 

Four cancer healing therapies are required: 

11 Cleansing Therapies: (For advanced cases) 

a) Castor oil for 40 days. 1 to 2 teaspoons of castor 
oil are mixed in 1 cup of hot water and ingested before 
bed. If one has more or less than three stools the next 
morning, the dose should be adjusted until persons 
have only three stools in the morning. Castor oil 
therapy is an excellent, gentle cleansing process. 

b) Harltakl for 1 year. One-quarter tsp. of harltakl 
is ingested 3 times daily. Depending on the season, 
add 1/4 teaspoon of sweets or spices to the harltakl. 
Summer/Fall : Mix with jaggery (when humid also 
add rock salt) 

Winter: Mix with ginger (when extremely cold use 
pippall). 

Spring: Mix with raw, uncooked honey 

c) Avoid meats, dairy (except las.si) and other 
protein-rich foods (although some protein is needed) 
because cancer is believed to be caused by excess 
protein. 


d) For Pitta- or Kapha-related cancers antitoxin 
herbs (bitters and pungents) like katuka and peppers 
are needed for cleansing the blood and improving 
circulation. 

[For less severe conditions, see additional 
therapies below.] 

2) Immune-Boosting Herbs: 

The immune system must strong to fight off the 
il lness. For those undergoing chemotherapy, the need 
for immune-boosting herbs becomes even greater. 

a) One or 2 teaspoons of chyavan prdsh is taken 
once or twice a day. 

b) Several herbs help boost the immune system 
without aggravating one’s dosha (e.g., shatdvari, 
ashwagandha, vidarl kand). The dose taken is 
between 3 grams to 1 ounce daily. 

3) Music Therapy: 

Soothing meditation music harmonizes and heals 
the mind, thoughts, and nervous system. Classical 
Indian ragas (songs) and devotional chants can be 
listened to throughout the day and night. Certain ragas 
are designed to create harmony for specific times of 
the day and night. Chants like Aum Namah Shivaya 
are especially useful. [See Chapter 10 on music 
therapy for more details.] 

4) Jvotish Astrology: 

A wider range of causes can exist when consid¬ 
ering a serious il lness. Ancient India has understood 
and successfully used the fields of medical astrol¬ 
ogy, life-purpose or dharma; and karma (past life 
actions that affect one’s present life). 

These early spiritual astrologers (Jyotishis) found 
a correlation between certain planets and correspond¬ 
ing diseases. Saturn and the north and south nodes of 
the Moon (Rahu and Ketu) were particularly related 
to mysterious diseases like cancer. From one’s as¬ 
trology chart, the disease-causing planets were rec¬ 
ognized, and the appropriate therapies suggested. 

As discussed earlier, Ayurveda believes when a 
person does not know or live the life they were meant 
to live, they feel a lack of purpose or emptiness. Life- 
purpose is also called God-given talent, or simply, 
doing what you love to do. In short, if one does not 
do what they love to do, emptiness develops which 















Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 22: Abnormal Growths/Neoplasm 


can lead to longing and suffering, eventually 
developing into (physical) cancer. 

Whenever persons develop serious illness, a wide 
range of complications, or a sudden onset of a health 
concern, Vedic belief suggests that it is related to 
harmful actions performed by the person in previous 
lives. Although the idea of reincarnation is certainly 
not scientific in the modem sense of the word, 
astrologers have successfully helped people 
understand and heal such disorders from the 
standpoint of karmic causes. It is presented here in 
brief only as an option available to those wishing to 
consider this field of cause and therapy. 

Even if one chooses not to investigate Jyotish 
astrology, considering a career that one loves is still a 
useful therapy to follow. 

Thus, the Jyolish/Vedic astrology chart becomes 
a useful tool to gain deeper insight into medical 
astrology, dharma or life-purpose, and karma. For 
the skeptical mind, these therapeutic approaches may 
be considered when other options fail. 

Additional Therapies 

Vdyu: Immune-strengthening herbs are best used 
when persons are very weak or undergoing surgery 
or chemotherapy. Herbs include ashwaganclhd, 
yogaraj guggul (Vayu-/Kapha-reducing), kapikachhu 
(Vayu-reducing), shatdvarl (Vayu-/Pitta-reducing), 
guduchl, bald, shildjit, triphald (tridoshic), taking 1 
or more ounces daily. 

Pitta and Kapha: (Lymph or skin cancer) blood 
cleansers l ik e manjishtha, saffron, brdhml, red clover, 
burdock, jasmine, and sarsaparilla are used, 1 to 3 
ounces daily with meals. They are best used fresh, if 
possible. 


Vdyu/Kapha: (Thyroid, neck or lymph cancer) these 
phlegm-reducing herbs include kelp, seaweed, Irish 
moss, pippall, ginger, black pepper, yogaraj guggul, 
jasmine, myrrh, turmeric, trikatu. Doses may be 1/2 
teaspoon, 3 times daily after meals. 

Tridoshic: (Breast, uterine, liver, pancreatic cancer) 
strong circulation-improving herbs break stagnation, 
reduce masses, and aid tissue healing. These include 
turmeric, saffron, safflower, myrrh, manjishtha, 
bhudmalakl (liver cleanser), yogaraj guggul. Doses 
can be about 1/2 teaspoon, 3 times daily. 

Foods: Meat, dairy, and excess protein are not advised 
since cancer cells are basically protein (though some 
protein is needed for digestive enzyme secretion). 
Raw vegetables and juices like wheat or barley grass, 
dandelion, celery, alfalfa and sunflower sprouts are 
best for Pitta and other strong persons, but should be 
taken with spices like ginger and garlic to keep the 
digestion strong. The green juices have much positive 
fife-force (prana), cleansing negative fife-energies. 
Weak persons need to take immune-boosting herbs 
fisted above. 

Brain Tumors: Manjishtha and brdhml (internally and 
as nasal snuff), shim clhdrd, and pahcha karma 
therapies appropriate to each dosha are very useful if 
persons are strong. 

Prostate Cancer: Chandraprabha vati 1,000 mg. 
twice daily; shildjit 500 mg. twice daily; kahchanar 
500 mg. twice daily; punarnavd 500 mg. twice daily; 
ashwagandha 500 mg. twice daily; carrot juice 4 oz. 
every morning. Herbs for Pitta and Kapha are also 
useful (see above). 

Jasmine is also useful for bone cancer. Tumors, 
goiter, and scrofula are discussed under the Metabolic 
System (Chapter 25). 












The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 



% 




MjdxrlxraicjtzAl 


















Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 23: Reproductive System 


Tradition, ethics, knowledge, humility; 
these are the four doors to a good mind. 

Mahabharata 

Chapter 23 
Reproductive System 

Female Reproduction, Childbirth, Planets and Newborns, Male 
Reproduction (including prostate), Venereal Diseases 


Female Reproductive Tract 
(Yonivyapat) 

auses: Twenty disorders of the female repro- 
I , ductive tract exist, caused by poor 

diet and lifestyle, imbalanced men¬ 
strual flow, defective ovum and ovary, and past karma. 
This results in an inability to conceive and other health 
concerns (e.g., tumors, hemorrhoids, menorrhagia). 

Specific Causes. Development and Symptoms: 

1. Vayu: Causes include excessive ingesting of foods 
and liquid, and life-styles that increase air. The 
excessed Vayu moves to the genital tract producing 
many types of pain, vaginal numbness, exhaustion, 
and other Vayu diseases. Menstrual discharge is pain¬ 
ful, frothy, thin, rough, and with sounds. 

2. Pitta: Causes include excessive ingesting of foods 
and liquids (e.g., sour, pungent, salty), and life-styles 
that increase fire. The excessed Pitta moves to the 
genital tract and produces burning, inflammation, 
fever, and heat. The menstrual flow is blue, yellow, 
or black with excessive hot discharges and foul odor. 

3. Kapha: Excessive watery foods, liquids, and life¬ 
styles create excess Kapha, forcing it to move to the 
female tract. This causes experiences that are slimy, 
cold, itching, pale, with mild pain. The menstrual flow 
is pale and slimy. 

4. Tridosha: Symptoms include excessive use of air, 
fire, and water foods, liquids, and life-styles. This 
causes the three doshas to move to the genital tract 
and uterus, causing symptoms of all three doshas (i.e., 
burning and pain with slimy, white discharges). 

5. Sdsrijd (Menstrual Blood): Pitta excesses afflicting 
the blood move to the female tract, causing excess 


bleeding. 

6. Arajaskd (Uterus, Tract and Blood): Excess Pitta 
in theses areas causes leanness and a poor 
complexion. 

7. Acharand: Not washing the genitalia causes itch¬ 
ing and excessive desires for men. It is caused by 
Vayu excesses. 

8. Atichcirand: Excessive sex aggravates Vayu, pro¬ 
ducing swelling, numbness, and pain in the genital 
tract. 

9. Prdk-charand: Young women having sexual 
relations at too early an age causing Vayu to afflict 
the female tract. This results in back, waist, thigh, 
and groin pain. It is caused by Vayu excesses. 

10. Upa-plutd: Taking Kapha-increasing foods in 
excess while pregnant or suppressing the uige to vomit 
or breathe causes Vayu excesses to carry Kapha to 
the female tract. This produces pale fluid discharges 
with piercing pain, white mucus, and Vayu and Kapha 
disorders during orgasm. 

11. Pari-plutd: Pitta dosha females who suppress the 
urges to sneeze and belch during sex cause Vayu and 
Pitta to afflict the female tract. This produces prema¬ 
ture orgasm. 

12. Uda-vartanl (dysmenorrhea): Suppressing natu¬ 
ral urges causes Vayu to move upward in the genital 
tract, causing painful and difficult menstrual dis¬ 
charges. After the discharge, relief is immediately felt. 
See page 508 for more details. 







The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


13. Karninl: Untimely straining during labor causes 
Vayu to become blocked by the fetus and combines 
with Kapha and blood. This produces growths 
(polyps) that block the menstrual flow. 

14. Putraghnl: Morbidity of menstrual fluid or ovum 
may produce Vayu (roughness) that results in the 
death of the fetus. 

15. Antar-mukhi: Sex after overeating and lying in 
unhealthful positions causes Vayu to press against 
the food. Vayu and food become blocked in the genital 
tract and cause vaginal curves and Vayu bone and 
muscle disorders. The vagina becomes very painful; 
sex becomes intolerable. 

16. Suchi-mukhl: Symptoms of roughness of Vayu in 
the mother’s genital tract affects the genital tract of 
the fetus (if female) and creates a decreased vaginal 
opening. 

17. Shushkd Yoni: Suppressing natural urges during 
sex excesses Vayu. This results in painful feces, urine 
retention, and dryness of the vaginal opening. 

18. Vdminl: When semen stays in the uterus and is 
expelled after 6 or 7 days, it is not accepted, and may 
be discharged with or without pain. It is caused by 
Vayu excesses. 

19. Shandhi: When Vayu genetic defects destroy the 
fetus’s ovaries, a female child will be bom with no 
breasts. 

20. Mahdyoni: Uncomfortable positions during sex 
on an uncomfortable bed, causes Vayu to become 
excessed. This dilates the uterus opening and the 
genital tract. Symptoms include pain, roughness with 
frothy discharge, fleshy growth, and joint and groin 
pain. 

For each dosha, general symptoms can be 
identified by the dosha responsible for the imbalance. 
Vayu: Disorders include scanty menstrual fluid that 
is dark red or brown, dry, or old. Symptoms include, 
menstrual cramping with lower back pain, headache, 
depression, nervousness, fear, anxiety, and loss of 
strength and resistance. Other symptoms include 
vaginal dryness, gas, constipation, distention; menses 
lasts 3 to 5 days; irregular and variable menses. 

Pitta : Disorders include excess menstrual flow, dark 
red or purple blood, warmth, clotting, fever, burning, 
flushed, red eyes, s ki n rashes, acne, anger, irritability, 


impatience, diarrhea, yellow stools; menses lasts 5 
to 7 days. 

Kapha: One experiences a moderate flow, pale or 
light red blood, sometimes with mucus, heaviness, 
tiredness, nausea, vomiting, excess phlegm and saliva, 
swelling breasts, edema, and sentimentality. 

Therapies: 

General: All female tract disorders are affected by 
Vayu. Thus for all female tract disorders, Vayu- 
reducing foods, drinks, and life-styles are used. First, 
Vayu is balanced, then the other doshas are treated. 
All disorders include therapies of unction (oil), 
sudation (sweat), and mild use of the five pahcha 
karma measures. Herbal tampon, pouring water and 
oil abhyahga (massage-like) can always be done, 
using chitrak, guduchi, bald with boiled milk and 
sesame oil. 

1. Vayu: Oil, fomentation (moist heat), enema, and 
Vayu-reducing habits, such as ghee, sesame seeds, 
and Vayu-reducing herbs, such as triphald, 
punamavd, turmeric, shatdvan, bald, pippali, chitrak, 
and guduchi. First, abhyahga with sesame oil and 
black salt is advised. Next, tube fomentation (ndcll 
svecla) and bolus fomentation is applied. Fastly, warm 
water is poured over the forehead, lower abdomen, 
and genitals; herbal tampons and abhyahga are also 
used. Shcitavan or ashwaganclhd is boiled in sesame 
oil and used as a vaginal douche. 

Stiff. Hard Tract—Sesame (V-), mustard (K-) oil, or 
ghee (P-) is applied locally to soften the tract. 


2. Vdyu/Pitta: A good tonic includes shatdvari, bald, 
pippali, guduchi, and punamavd with ghee in boiled 
mi lk . 

Tract Pain—Boiled milk with gokshura, guduchi, and 
triphald, are helpful. 

Pain In Genital Tract Sides—Herbs include pippali, 
black salt, calamus, chitrak, and ghee. 


3. Pitta: Cold, blood-pacifying measures, and Pitta- 
reducing herbs are suggested. Ghee is used 
















Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 23: Reproductive System 


in pouring water, abhyahga, and herbal tampons. 
Herbs include shatavari and pippall boiled in milk . 
Foods include grapes, cane sugar, and raw honey. 

Uterine inflammation—Red raspberry is useful. 
Endometritis/PID (pelvic inflammatory disease) — 

Both are Pitta conditions resulting from accumulated 
heat and stagnant blood, with infection and 
inflammation. Additionally, liver therapies are needed. 
Pitta-reducing herbs are needed, including shatavari, 
aloe vera gel, gotu kola, dandelion, katuka, 
bhudmalakl, and mahjishtha. 

4. Kapha: Rough and hot therapies and Kapha- 
reducing habits are suggested. Cleansing 
suppositories are frequently used that are made of 
cloth, barley powder, black salt, pippall, and black 
pepper. (They are followed by a warm water wash). 
It is also used for cleansing the genital tract. 

Swollen slimy discharge. Upaplutd, flat, painful, with 

emptions—Tampons of neem, amalakl, mango, and 
pomegranate, with boiled milk and sesame oil are 
used. This is followed by massaging the waste, back, 
and sacral region and administering an oil enema. 
Bald, ashwagandha, ginger, and pippall are boiled 
in sesame oil and used as a vaginal douche. 
Pale/white discharges—Herbs include amalakl paste 
(i.e., made with water), cane sugar, and raw honey. 
First oil is placed in the vagina. Then licorice, lodhra, 
and prlyahgu powder are mixed with honey, and made 
into a big, round tablet. This tablet is then placed in 
the vagina at bedtime. It is washed out at dawn with 
hot water. Suppositories made of red raspberry, 
bayberry, bibhltakl (astringents), and raw honey are 
placed in the vagina to remove the discharge. Vaginal 
fumigation is done with guggul, barley, sesame oil, 
and ghee. 

Endometriosis—This is usually a Kapha disorder with 
extra uterine membrane growth. Kapha-reducing 
habits are required, including herbs such as khadit; 
ashoka, guggul, myrrh, turmeric, dandelion, black 
pepper, katuka, and honey. These herbs reduce 
tumors, fibroids, and Kapha. 

5. Dual/Tridosha: Combination therapies 

6. Sdriid (Uterine Bleeding/Raktayoni): Sesame 


seeds, yogurt, ghee, honey, red raspberry, mahjishtha, 
musta, and turmeric. Vaginal douche with kutaj is 
used. 

7. Arajaskd (amenorrhea —delayed or no menses): 

A vaginal douche with dalchlnl, aloe gel, small 
cardamom, ginger, gulkand, kutaj bark, and old 
jaggery are used. Another douche includes, yogurt, 
sour fruit, amalakl, ashwagandha, shatavari, ghee, 
and boiled mi lk. It is generally a Vayu condition, but 
sometimes Pitta or Kapha will be the cause. 

Vayu: (Due to coldness and other Vayu excesses). 
Aloe vera gel, myrrh, turmeric, ginger, cinnamon, 
Vayu-reducing foods, drinks, and lifestyle are 
advised. Warm sesame oil sprinkled over the lower 
abdomen or as a douche is useful. Herbal iron 
supplements, laxatives like triphald, aloe vera gel or 
castor oil are used. Rejuvenatives include 
ashwagandha, shatavari, Kapikachhu, and musta. 

Pitta: (mild symptoms) Turmeric or saffron in boiled 
milk; rose, musta, and dandelion are advised. 

Kapha: (Resulting from congestion and sluggishness) 
Recommended herbs include ginger, cinnamon, 
pippall, myrrh, safflower, turmeric, cinnamon, and 
jatdmdnshl. 

8. Acharand: Wash and remove discharges with neem, 
vdsdk, pippall, grapes, and vinegar; or triphald and 
yogurt/water. Shatavari and ashwa-gandha boiled in 
sesame oil may also be used as a vaginal douche. 

9. ) Aticharand: Sesame oil enemas and Vayu- 
reducing foods and drinks; with shatavari, ashwa- 
gandha. Barley, wheat, yeast, kut, prlyahgu, and bald 
are placed in the vagina. 

10. Prdk-charand: Shatavari and ashwagandha 
boiled in sesame oil are used as a vaginal douche. 
Sesame oil enemas and Vayu-reducing foods and 
drinks; with shatavari, ashwagandha are used. Barley, 
wheat, yeast, bald, kut, and prlyahgu are placed in 
the vagina. 

11. Upa-plutd (or pari-plutd): Unction, fomentation, 






















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


and sudation are followed by oil tampons and 
medicated oil drops that are placed in the vagina for 
lubrication. Herbs include kut, pnyahgu, and bald. 

12. Uda-vartanl (dysmenorrhea): Unction with ghee 
and oil; fomentation, boiled milk, sesame oil, ghee, 
and dashmul enema are taken for enemas and vaginal 
douches. See page 508 for further information. 

13. Kaminl: Shatavari and ashwagandha are boiled 
in sesame oil and used as a vaginal douche. 
Suppositories with kushthd, pippall, triphala, and 
black salt may be mixed into a semi-solid paste. 
Therapies include lodhra, pnyahgu, and soft arka 
leaves with rice vinegar (kahji). 

14. Putraghni: Vaginal douche with kutajis used. Kutqj 
and gambhdri barks boiled with ghee are ingested. 

15. Antar-mukhl: Vayu-reducing therapies are used. 

16. Suchl-mukhl: Vayu-reducing herbs are used with 
surgical repair. 

17. Shushka Yoni: Shatavari or ashwagandha is boiled 
in sesame oil and used as a vaginal douche. Unction 
with ghee and oil; fomentation, boiled milk, sesame 
oil, ghee, and dashmul is taken as enemas and vaginal 
douches. Ghee boiled with shatavari is poured into 
the vagina and held there for 2 hours. This procedure 
is continued for a month or until healed. 

18. Vdmini: Unction, fomentation and sudation are 
used followed by oil tampons, and lastly Vayu- 
reducing medicated oil (e.g., shatavari and ghee) (see 
above). 

19. Shandhl: 

Conception: Therapies include ghee with triphala, 
punarnavd, turmeric, shatavari, chitrak, lodhra, 
ashoka, bayberry bark, and guduchl. 

Miscarriage Cleansing: Musta, triphala, neem, 
guduchl, aloe gel, turmeric, mahjishthd, and myrrh 
with honey are taken for 1 to 2 weeks. Tone with 
shatavari, ashwagandha, aloe gel, mahjishthd, gotu 
kola, red raspberry. 

d* 


20. Mahdyoni: Unction with ghee and oil; 
fomentation, boiled milk, sesame oil, ghee, and 
dashmul is taken for enemas and vaginal douches. 
Ghee boiled with shatavari is poured into the vagina 
and held there for 2 hours. 

Prasrastd Yoni (Genital Tract Displacement) : After 
unction and fomentation the tract is replaced. Covered 
tracts are pressed with the hand; contracted tracts are 
dilated; bulged tracts are pushed inside; dilated ones 
are manipulated. Abhyahga (massage-like) is done 
with ghee and added to the milk for fomenting. 
Amalakl, licorice, ginger, salum, kshlr kdkoll, and 
mahd meda are boiled with ghee, then poured into 
the vagina. It is retained until the urge for urination 
occurs. 


Menorrhagia (Asrigdara or Pradara) 

Excess menses or spotting is usually due to Pitta 
excesses. It is caused by eating excess salty, sour, 
heavy, pungent, burning, and fatty foods and animal 
products. The Vayu and blood thus becomes excessed 
and move into the menses channels, increasing the 
menstrual flow. There are 4 types of pradara: Vayu, 
Pitta, Kapha, andTridoshic. Normal menses is known 
by its monthly regularity without symptoms. It is 
normal in color, lasts for 5 days, and is moderate in 
quantity. 

Symptoms 

General: Aches all over the body, pain in the abdomen 
during menstruation. 

Vayu: Frothy, thin, rough, blackish or reddish, with 
or without pain; intense pain in the waist, groin, heart, 
ribs, back, and pelvic areas. 

Pitta : Bluish, black, deep red or yellow, very hot, 
frequent and painful with burning, redness, thirst, 
mental confusion, fever, and giddiness. 

Kapha: Symptoms include slimy, pale, heavy, oily, 
cold, and viscous discharge, with mild pain; 
associated with vomiting, anorexia, nausea, difficult 
breathing, and cough. 

Tridosha : Symptoms of all three doshas are seen. 
Therapies: Are the same as those listed above for 
























Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 23: Reproductive System 


the three doshas related to female tract disorders. 
Generally, herbs include red raspberry and manjishtha 
to help stop bleeding. Then tonics can be given such 
as ashwagandha, ashoka, shatdvari, aloe vera gel, 
and dmalakl. 

General: Warm water or sesame oil is poured over 
the lower abdomen and genitalia and used as a douche. 
Foods, drinks, and life-styles appropriate to the 
implicated dosha are followed. 

Vavu —Therapies include sesame powder yogurt, 
ghee, and honey. 

Pitta—Therapies include lotus root, musta, boiled 
milk, cane sugar, and honey. 

Kapha—Therapies include mustard oil, licorice, 
lotus, dmalakl leaves, and alum. 

Malodor: A decoction or paste of aromatic herbs 
gudiichi, neem, dhataki flower, chitrak, and 
ndgkeshar are applied to remove odors. 

Miscellaneous: For genital tract defects, menses, 
and white, blue, yellow, red, and black discharges, 
mango, kutaj, bilwa, musta, black pepper, ginger, red 
sandalwood, arjuna, and honey, followed by rice 
water are helpful. 


Miscellaneous Disorders and Therapies 

Menstrual regulators: Turmeric and saffron (or 
safflower) are used. 

Spasm regulators: Herbs include fennel, asafoetida, 
and jatdmdnshl. 

Rejuvenatives/tonics: Herbs include shatavan, red 
raspberry, saffron, aloe vera gel, turmeric (with ginger, 
fennel, and cardamom). 

Tumors/Cvsts/Fibroids: They are most common in 
Kapha doshas and are usually benign. Symptoms 
include swelling, dampness, and congestion. Large 
tumors or cysts are safe to remove through surgical 
measures. The best herbs ar ekhadir or fibroids and 
ashoka for cysts. Additional herbs include guggul, 
saffron, musta, manjishtha, pippall, turmeric, katukd, 
and barberry with honey. 

Vavu: Symptoms include pain, dryness, varying in 
size and location. Herbs include musta, guggul, 
manjishtha, aloe vera gel, myrrh, red raspberry, and 


jatamanshl. 

Pitta : Inflammation, infection, swelling, and heat. 
Herbs used are ashoka, manjishtha, musta, red rasp¬ 
berry, manjishtha, chamomile, aloe vera gel, guggul, 
turmeric, and saffron. 


PMS 

Vavu Symptoms: Anxiety, depression, insomnia, 
constipation, headache, severe cramping, spacey, 
dizziness, fainting, rapid mood shifts, being hard to 
please, feeling abandoned, chills, thirst, dry skin, and 
feeling suicidal. 

Pitta Symptoms: Anger, irritability, argumentative, 
diarrhea, fever, sweating, warmth, acne and skin 
rashes, abundant menstrual flow, possibly with clots, 
early onset of menses, spotting. 

Kapha Symptoms: Fatigue, heaviness, crying, 
sentimentality, longing for love, mild emotions, cold 
or flu, mucus, lack of hunger, nausea, swollen breasts, 
edema, late onset, white or pale menses with clots or 
mucus. 

Therapies: 

General: Herbs include turmeric, saffron, musta, and 
angelica. 

Vdyu: Herbs include turmeric or saffron to promote 
menses; fennel or jatdmdnshl to reduce spasms; shiro 
dhara or oil poured over the genitalia or lower abdo¬ 
men; vaginal douche with ashwagandha and 
shatdvari is recommended. Coffee, tea, tobacco, al¬ 
cohol, and drugs should be avoided. Vayu-reducing 
foods, drinks, and lifestyle are advised. 

Pitta : Herbs include turmeric, saffron (as above), 
shatdvari, musta, manjishtha, gotu kola, aloe vera 
gel, and bhrihgardj. Pitta-reducing foods, drinks, and 
lifestyle are advised. 

Kapha: Herbs include aloe vera gel, turmeric, musta, 
cinnamon, pippall, and ginger. Avoiding heavy or oily 
foods is advised. Kapha-reducing foods, drinks, and 
lifestyle are advised. 























The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Menopause 

Hormonal and emotional balancing and 
reproductive tract rejuvenation are essential. It is 
generally related to Vayu symptoms of nervousness, 
insomnia, depression, and anxiety. Vayu-reducing 
foods, drinks, and lifestyle are required, along with 
aloe vera gel, myrrh, shatavari, saffron, kapikachhu, 
and ashwagandha in boiled milk . Chyavan prash is 
another good tonic. 

Pitta : Symptoms include anger, irritability, impatience, 
hot flashes. Pitta-reducing habits are followed, along 
with aloe vera gel, shatavari, and saffron in boiled 
milk . 

Kapha: Symptoms include heaviness, fatigue, leth¬ 
argy, tendency towards overweight and water reten¬ 
tion. Herbs include pippali, ginger, and guggul. 


Dysmenorrhea 

(Difficult menses, often with cramping) 

This is generally a Vayu condition. 

Vayu: Symptoms include spasms, uterine dryness, 
bloating, gas, or constipation. Suggested herbs include 
musta, shatavari, guggul, aloe vera gel, myrrh, red 
raspberry, turmeric, and jatdmdnshi. Warm sesame 
oil is poured over or applied to the lower abdomen. 
Sesame oil and shatavari are used as a douche. 
Pitta : Congestion develops from stagnant blood 
obstructions, with burning and diarrhea. Herbs include 
brdhmi, musta, turmeric, and saffron. The latter two 
can be boiled in mi lk . 

Kapha: Congestion develops from stagnant blood 
obstructions, with edema or phlegm (congestion). Hot 
herbs are used, such as pippali vachd, guggul, myrrh, 
and ginger. 


antibiotics, excess sex, infections, venereal diseases, 
and lack of cleanliness. Therapies focus on the excess, 
not the bacteria. Sour douches of vinegar or yogurt 
are most useful, along with acidophilus tablets. 
Kapha: Herbs include aloe powder, ginger, and 
pippali taken with honey. Other useful herbs are red 
raspberry, shatavari, lotus seeds, and guggul. 

Pitta : Symptoms include yellow color, foul odor, 
bloodiness, and burning. Herbs include aloe powder, 
katukd, and bhudmalaki. For internal use only, aloe 
vera gel, turmeric, and mahjishthd are advised. 
Vayu: Symptoms include brown color, stickiness, 
dryness, and severe pain. 


Hysterectomy 

The removal of the uterus creates hormone im¬ 
balances, devitalization, imbalanced metabolism 
(leading to weight gain), emotional imbalance, and 
insecurity. 

Vayu: Air increases, causing ungroundedness and 
anxiety. 

Pitta: Symptoms include anger, irritability, and heat. 
Kapha: Symptoms of fatigue, sentimentality, weight 
gain, and congestion can develop. 

Immediately after surgery, turmeric and arjuna 
are taken to promote healing. Therapies include re¬ 
productive and hormonal tonics like shatavari, aloe 
vera gel, saffron, chyavan prash; brain tonics, such 
as brdhmi (or brdhmi ghee), bhrihgardj, and 
jatdmdnshi arc recommended. 

Note: Most of the conditions pertaining to the female 
reproductive system are related to hormones. The 
main cause of hormone-related diseases is life style 
and diet. 


Leukorrhea/prolapse 

(Abnormal vaginal discharges) 

When the natural acidic nature of the vagina is 
not healthy, bacteria, fungi, or protozoa will develop. 
It usually results from Kapha-excess mucus, 

















Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 23: Reproductive System 


In our modem society, food is produced in larger quan¬ 
tities in the shortest possible time. To achieve this end, 
a variety of growth hormones and chemicals are used 
to develop these products. Processed foods that are 
loaded with hormones and chemicals create a serious 
imbalance in the body’s own rate of growth and hor¬ 
monal system. A large number of the hormones and 
chemicals used to fatten animals are female hormones. 
Thus, when foods containing these chemicals are in¬ 
gested, they wreak havoc with hormonal balance in 
the female body. 

Many of the problems caused by eating animal 
products can be solved if organic animal products 
are taken. However, Ayurveda still cautions about the 
subtler karmic implications from eating animals. 


Ayurvedic Obstetrics (Childbirth) 

Discussed in 
this section are 

the Ayurvedic f P 

principles of con- >k 3BL. . y 

ception, preg- 

nancy, embryol- _ ' 

ogy (the devel- „) 

opmentofthefe- XT" W 

tus), and deliv- \ 

ery. Scientifi- \JV/ 

cally minded 

readers will see 

some amazing 

parallels between what is known today through mod¬ 
em medicine and technology and what was known 
intuitively more than 5,000 years ago. Procedures for 
pregnancy, mantras, foods, and abhyanga (a type of 
massage) are also discussed. 

Embryology 

The Soul (atman), based on past life actions 
(karma), enters healthy semen (shukra) and ovum 
(drtava), forming an embryo. The embryo is formed 
by the subtle elements ether (dkdsha), air (vdyu), fire 
(tejas), water ( ap), and earth (pritvi). All five elements 
are contained in both the semen and ovum. Later, the 
soul or atman enters the embryo. 


Males are developed when there is more semen 
(aY chromosome, thus producing XY chromosomes). 
A female fetus is created when there is more ovum 
present (X chromosome, thus producing XX chro¬ 
mosomes). Vayu divides the semen and ovum into 
many parts, giving rise to many embryos (i.e., fertili¬ 
zation of more than one ovum). The best chance for 
healthy offspring will occur when the female, 16 years 
old or over, mates with a male who is over 20- to 25 
years old, and both people are healthy (i.e., none of 
the three doshas are vitiated). 

The Charak Samhitd notes that the child receives 
from the ovum, their s kin , blood, flesh, fat, umbilicus, 
heart, liver, spleen, kidneys, bladder, rectum, stomach, 
colon, anus, small intestine, and organ membranes. 
Derived from the semen are the hair, nails, teeth, 
bones, veins, ligaments, arteries, and reproductive 
fluid. Factors derived from the atman (soul) are the 
taking of birth, life span, Self-realization, mind, 
senses, intake and excretion, stimulation and essence 
of the senses. Other factors include shape, voice, 
complexion, desire for happiness and sorrow, l ik es 
and dislikes, consciousness, courage, intellect, 
memory, egoism, and efforts. 

Wholesome food and life-style form a healthy fetus. 
This produces healthy rasa (plasma) in the women 
that is necessary for both her life and the production 
of the fetus’ growth, strength, satisfaction, plumpness, 
and enthusiasm. The wholesomeness of the mind is 
also essential, since the mind connects the soul to the 
physical body. The factors that the mind gives the 
embryo are conduct, likes and dislikes, purity, 
memory, attachment, and detachment. Other factors 
include valor, fear, anger, fatigue, enthusiasm, 
sharpness, softness, seriousness, and stability or 
instability. The more sattwic the mind, the more 
predominant the positive qualities. Thus, the embryo 
is formed from various factors. ( Charak Samhitd: 
Sharlr-asthdna, Ch 4, verse 6,7,10-13) 

Doshas arc healed with herbs described earlier (e.g., 
ashwagandha, shatdvarl, and ghee, which build the 
semen and ovum (shukra clhdtu). Additionally, the 
female organ is cleansed using herbal uttarabastis 
(vaginal douches). Healthy semen is white, heavy, 
unctuous, sweet, copious, and thick lik e honey or 
ghee. Healthy menstrual blood is noted by its not 
staining a cloth after it has been washed. 





The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Preparation and Conception 

When a couple desires to conceive, the following 
procedures are followed. At the first sign of 
menstruation, for three days, the woman is advised 
to think only good thoughts, avoid bathing and 
dressing up, reduce her weight, and avoid sexual 
activity. She is also advised to sleep on a hard bed 
and take meals (in small portions) consisting solely 
of milk and small barley for purification of the 
alimentary tract. On the fourth day, she bathes, and 
along with her husband, dresses in white. 

They adorn themselves with flower garlands and 
should feel attracted towards one another. A woman 
becomes fertile following menstruation and fresh 
blood is formed in the uterus. It is said that if a couple 
wants a male offspring, to conceive on an even day; 
and for a female child, on an odd day. These days are 
counted from the first day of menstruation. 
(Additionally, there are many sacred rites that can 
assure conception of a healthy male child with good 
qualities. (See Charak: Sharirasthana Chapter 8 Verse 
10-14; and Ashtanga Hndayam: Sharirasthana Ch 
1, verse 37-38) 

“The couple who have pure shukra and drtava 
(semen/ovum) are healthy and in love with each 
other...indulge in oleation, purificatory therapies, and 
nourishing enemas. The male uses milk and ghee with 
sweet, ojas-building herbs. The woman uses sesame 
oil, black gram, ovum building, and Pitta-increasing 
herbs.” (Ashtanga Hndayam: Sharirasthana Ch 1, 
verse 18a - 20a) 

The bedroom should be clean and filled with 
pleasant aromas. The man ascends the bed with his 
right leg first; and the woman with her left leg. A 
woman is advised to he on her back to keep the three 
doshas balanced in her uterus. There is a special 
mantra recited by the husband, the “Ahirasi sutam ” 


“O Lord, you are the procurer, you are the life, you 
are present everywhere, may Dhdtd bestow on me 
good, may Vidhata bestow the divine radiance, may 
Brahman, Brihaspati, Vishnu, Soma, Surya, Ashwini- 
twins, Bhaga, Mitra, and Varuna grant me a valiant 


Male offspring were highly prized in ancient times; 
the prayer can be changed to replace “son” with 
“child.” 

Other mantras found in the Rik Veda are chanted 
by a priest, including, “Vishnuryani Kalpayatu ” (May 
Lord Vishnu fulfill her desire in the womb). 

“May Lord Vishnu prepare the womb. May Lord 
Tvastr make the respective forms. May Lord 
Prajdpati spray the sperm. May Lord Dhdtri protect 
your wife’s womb.” 

Cohabitation then occurs with affection and 
cheerfulness. Afterwards, the woman is sprinkled with 
cold water. 


Lifestyle During Pregnancy 

The woman is advised to take various herbs to 
nourish herself and the fetus, including brdhml, 
guduchl, and ghee boiled with milk. The herbs are 
also worn as a talisman and held by the wife. The 
wife is looked at affectionately, attended to by her 
husband and attendants who give her all the 
wholesome foods she wants, especially butter, ghee, 
and milk . 

Many factors may impair the pregnancy or cause 
abortion. Thus, she should avoid, excess sexual 
activities, exertion, excess sleep or staying up late, 
sitting on uncomfortable or seats that are too high, 
and walking in high heels. Grief, anger, fear, strong 
emotions, suppression of natural urges and desires, 
fasting, long walks, pungent, hot, constipating and 
hard to digest foods, laxative herbs, and wearing red 
are also avoided. Other habits to avoid include staring 
into deep pits, wells, or waterfalls, drinking alcohol, 
eating meat, sleeping on her back, and disobeying 
elder women. She is also advised not to undergo 
pahcha karma (until the eighth month), excessive 
uncomfortable travel, excessive or irritating noises. 

Many activities of the parents can cause harm to 
their newborn child. Both husband and wife cause 
these troubles before conception (i.e., foods, lifestyle 
habits). During pregnancy, the actions of the woman 
mainly cause these unhealthy results through her 
foods and lifestyle. Of course external factors can 
also influence her health. 





Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 23: Reproductive System 


Activities Causing Diseases in the Child 

Harmful Activity and the Results in the Child 1. 
Constantly sleeping on her back. Result: umbilicus 
twists around the neck of the fetus. 

2. Sleeping in the open air or traveling alone at night. 
Result: mental illness. 

3. Verbal and physical abuse. Result: epilepsy. 

4. Excessive cohabitation. Result: rudeness, lacking 
will. 

5. Constant grief: Result: fearfulness, thinness, short¬ 
lived. 

6. Thinking ill of others. Result: anti-social behavior, 
envious, weak-willed. 

7. Stealing. Result: laziness, maliciousness. 

8. Anger. Result: deceitfulness, jealousy, anger. 

9. Excessive sleep. Result: dullness, lethargy, poor 
digestion. 

10. Alcohol addiction. Result: thirst, poor memory, 
fickleness. 

11. Eating pork. Result: red eyes, respiratory 
problems. 

12. Eating fish. Result: eye closure problems. 

13. Sweets addiction. Result: urinary disorders, 
diabetes, mental disorders, obesity. 

14. Addiction to sour things. Result: bleeding, skin, 
and eye disorders. 

15. Salt addiction. Result: kidney and urinary 
disorders, ojas depletion. 

16. Addiction to pungent tastes. Result: weakness, 
reproductive problems. 

17. Addiction to bitter tastes. Result: emaciation, 
weakness. 

18. Addiction to astringent tastes. Result: gray 
complexion, constipation, gas, distention. 


Wholesome Therapy During Pregnancy 


Month 

Therapy 

1 

cold milk 

2 

boiled milk with sweet tasting 
herbs (e.g. 

3 

boiled milk with honey and ghee 

4 

milk with 12 grams of butter 

5 

ghee 

6 

(sweet) herbal ghee (e.g. 

7 

same as 6* 

8 

milk, easily digested grain broth, 
and ghee 

9 

medicated oil enema, oleation of 
uterus and genital tract, daily body 
oil abhyanga ** 


* During the seventh month, the fetus causes pres¬ 
sure on the chest, leading to itching and burning sen¬ 
sations. Therapy: To relieve this condition, eat 12 
grams of butter, boiled with sweet herbs. Breasts and 
abdomen are anointed with sandalwood paste (herb 
powder and water), musta, manjishtha, and triphald. 
A gentle oil abhyanga (massage-like) is given. Small 
quantities of sweet foods are to be taken every 3 to 4 
hours to alleviate Vayu. Fats and salt should be 
avoided. 

** In the ninth month, abhyanga is done to soften 
the placenta, pelvis, waist, and the sides of the chest 
and back; to expel gas, for easy elimination of urine 
and stools; to soften s kin and nails; to give strength 
and enhance the complexion; to create an easy deliv¬ 
ery of a healthy child. 



If the right side of a woman’s abdomen is more el¬ 
evated, and she first gets milk in her right breast, pre¬ 
fers things using her right side, longs for masculine 
activities, and dreams about them., it is said that she 
will give birth to a male child. If the opposite fea¬ 
tures are noticed, including more feminine charac¬ 
teristics, desires to dance, play, or sing, enjoy aro¬ 
mas, and flowers, she will give birth to a female. 

Before the 9th month, a special room or apart- 




























The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


ment should be constructed for the woman. Pleasant 
aromas, colors, foods, and herbs are placed in the 
room. At the onset of the 9th month, female relatives 
and midwives attend to the pregnant women in the 
apartment. Auspicious days and times, favorable 
moon and constellation positions determine when 
sacred lire rites for peace and good fortune should be 
performed by brdhmanas (priests). The priests use 
mantras, grass, food, water, and cows in the ceremo¬ 
nies. 

Impending Delivery Signs 

The Ayurvedic scriptures suggest that either on 
the day before or on the day of delivery, the expectant 
mother exhibits will show signs of fatigue, looseness 
of the abdomen and eyes, heaviness in the lower parts 
of the body, loss of appetite (or taste), and increased 
salivation. She may feel pain or discomfort in the 
thighs, waist, abdomen, back, heart region, bladder, 
groin, and vaginal tract. Other symptoms include 
tearing pain, pricking, pulsating, and fluid discharge, 
followed by the onset of labor pains, discharge of 
fluid from the womb, and increased frequency of 
urination. 

Once these signs are experienced, she observes 
auspicious rites, holds masculine-named fruit, is given 
an oil abhyanga and a warm bath. Following this, 
she drinks thin, easily digested grain soup, with ghee. 
Then she lies on a hard bed, with legs bent. Her body, 
especially the lower belly, is continuously rubbed with 
warm oil. Her female attendants console her as well. 
Some authorities suggest that she inhale herbal snuff, 
including cardamom (eld), vachd (calamus), and 
chitrak. This promotes an easy delivery by helping 
the fetus detach from the upper belly region and move 
to its lower region. 

Once the fetus has detached from the heart region 
(upper abdomen), labor pains will increase and the 
fetus will have turned. The woman should lie on a 
bed. Mantras are then recited in her ears by one of 
her attendants. 

“May the five elements, Vishnu and Prajdpati 
always protect you, the pregnant one, and help the 
delivery of the child. O auspicious one, may the 
delivery take place without any distress, either to you 
or your child, who has the brilliance of the divine 
warrior [Kartik], and be protected by Kartik 


The attendants console her, advising her not to 
strain when there are no labor pains, as it causes 
difficult breathing, cough, enlarged spleen, and 
wasting diseases. When labor begins, she is advised 
to increase pressure slowly and gradually. When the 
child appears, the women announce the delivery and 
the gender of the baby to give the new mother relief, 
joy, and help her regain strength. She is then fanned, 
sprinkled with water, and drinks water as well. 


Post-Partum Therapies For New-Born Baby 
(Balopacharanlya Ahyaya) 

Immediately after birth, the baby’s skin is 
cleansed using rock salt and ghee. Then, to relieve 
the fatigue of its birth, the baby is anointed with 
(medicated) bald oil. Finally, two stones are hit 
together at the root of the baby’s ears and a sacred 
hymn is chanted into its right ear by the father or 
mother: 

“You have been bom from every organ of the body 
and mind’s heart (hridaya) of your parents. You are 
we in the form of a (son/daughter); may you live for 
a hundred years. May you attain long life. Fet the 
stars, the quarters, nights, and days protect you.” 

After the child settles down, the umbilical cord is 
tied with a thread 4-finger’s width above the navel, 
then severed. The cord is fastened around the baby’s 
neck (without causing harm). The umbilicus is next 
massaged with kushthd oil and then given a bath with 
a decoction of tree barks with milk y sap or water 
boiled with fragrant herbs. The water can be boiled 
with silver or gold in it as well. 

A cloth soaked in sesame oil is placed over the 
baby’s head while the baby is fed an herbal sweet 
(e.g., brdhmi, vachd, shafikh pushpl, haritakl, 
dmalaki, ghee, raw honey, gold). The dose is no more 
than that which fits in the baby’s palm. This confection 
will stimulate the development of intelligence, long 
life, and strength. Prayers for the baby to develop 
these qualities are chanted while the baby eats. 

The baby is made to vomit the uterine fluid by 
eating ghee mixed with rock salt. Then religious rites 
are performed for the baby. 





Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 23: Reproductive System 


Breast Feeding 

The milk of the mother is not considered ready for 
nursing for the first 3 or 4 days after delivery owing 
to the dilation of the milk duct orifices. Thus the child 
is fed the juice of durva mixed with honey and ghee 
(quantity the size of the child’s handful), 3 times a 
day for the first 3 days. Mantras or prayers for the 
baby’s protection, health, intelligence, and longevity 
are recited over the meals. 

On the 2nd and 3rd days, the baby is given ghee 
with white kantkarl (or ginseng— aralia qinquefolia) 
for all three meals. On the 4th day, the child eats only 
two meals (morning and noon). In the evening, 
mother’s mi lk is given from the right breast after 
squeezing a little bit of the milk out; reciting a mantra 
over the breast. A pitcher of water impregnated with 
mantras is kept near the child’s head and the baby 
licks some fresh butter. This procedure is followed 
before all nursing meals. Hereafter, the baby nurses 
twice a day. 

A mantra is recited over the breast as follows, “O 
beautiful women, may the four oceans of the earth 
contribute to the secretion of milk in your breasts for 
the purpose of improving your baby’s physical 
strength. O you with a beautiful face, may the child, 
reared on your milk, attain a long life l ik e the gods 
made immortal from their ambrosia dri nk s.” 

Should the mother be unable to breast-feed, two 
wet-nurses or women who can breast feed, substitute 
for the mother. These women should be affectionate, 
healthy, observing celibacy, of the same dosha as the 
mother, eating foods and living a lifestyle in 
accordance with their dosha, and have children of 
their own. 



Breast Milk 

Breast milk can become deficient as a result of 
grief, anger, fasting, and exertion. Happiness, love, 
nutrition, and rest increase breast milk . Milk, durba, 
and fennel, also increase breast milk . If breast milk is 
not available, the child can drink cow’s or goat’s mi lk 
boiled with the 5-herb group known as hrisva 
pahchamul (brihatl, kantkarl, gokshura, shdliparhl, 
and prisnaparnl). 

Breast milk diseases occur from eating before the 
last meal is digested, eating unsuitable or 
incompatible foods, irregularity and excess of meals 
and habits. Other causes include regularly ingesting 
of salty, sour, pungent, and stale foods; mental and 
physical stress, staying up late, taking naps after lunch, 
and excess mental work. Further causes include 
suppressing and forcing natural urges, ingesting meat, 
fat, and wine; lack of exercise, injury, and anger. Other 
causes include weakness or wasting due to illness. 
The channels carrying mi lk cause eight forms of 
disorders. 

Symptoms: 

Vayu causes abnormal tastes, excess froth, and 
roughness. Pitta causes abnormal color and malodor. 
Kapha causes oiliness, sliminess, and heaviness. 

1. Vayu affects the taste of milk, causing slow growth 
and weight loss. 

2. Vayu, churning the milk, produces excess froth 
that causes difficult milk flow. Upon drinking this 
milk, the child will develop a weak voice and will 
retain urine, stool, and gas. Vayu headaches or colds 
with mucus (coryza) are also common. 

3. Vayu dries up the unctuous nature of the milk, 
causing the child who drinks it to becomes debilitated. 

4. Pitta, causing abnormal coloration of milk (e.g., 
blue, yellow, black), will create a poor complexion, 
sweat, thirst, diarrhea, constant fever, and no desire 
to drink from the breast in the child. 

5. Pitta causes the milk to spoil, giving the child who 
drinks it anemia and jaundice. 

6. Kapha makes the milk too oily; and the child 
















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


drinking it develops vomiting, abdominal distention, 
salivation, sleepiness and exhaustion, difficulty 
breathing, cough, excessive discharge, and a 
pervading sense of darkness. 

7. Kapha causes the milk to become slimy. The child 
will salivate, develop swollen face and eyes, and 
become dull. 

8. Kapha causes heaviness of the milk, causing heart 
disease. 


General Milk Cleansing 

The mother or wet-nurse is first oiled and 
fomented, then undergoes emesis with a neem, 
calamus, and kutaj decoction. After resting, eating, 
and digesting her food, she is massaged with oil. Then 
the woman is purged with a haritaki and/or triphald 
decoction with raw honey. Afterwards, she follows 
her Ayurvedic diet. This cleansing prepares her for 
nursing. Cleansing foods include rice, barley, cane 
sugar, vegetable soup, green legumes, lentils, made 
with neem, amalaki, trikatu, and rock salt. Herbs 
include guduchl, ashwagandha, and ginger. 

General: 

Vavu : Dashmul decoction is drunk for three days. 
Thereafter one drin ks Vayu-reducing medicated ghee, 
followed by beer foam to lubricate the body. A mild 
purgative is then given, followed by enema and sweat 
therapy. The woman then eats cedar, cardamom, 
qjamoda mixed with ghee and rock candy. 

Pitta : Mother and child both drink a decoction of 
guduchl, shatdvarl, neem, sandalwood and cedar. 
Alternatively, they can take a decoction of triphald, 
mustd, bhudmalaki, and katukd. Ghee can be taken 
with these herbs. Pitta-reducing purgatives, abhyahga 
(massage-like), and lepa (body pastes) are also 
required. 

Kapha : The child licks ghee mixed with powder of 
licorice and myrrh, or myrrh and pippall. Madanapluil 
is made into a paste with honey and applied to the 
mother’s breasts and baby’s lips. This will easily cause 
the baby to vomit (thereby removing excess Kapha). 
The mother should follow emetic therapies discussed 
in Chapter 7. After emesis, mother and child drink a 
decoction of cedar, kutaj, and tagara and follow a 


Kapha-reducing food plan. The mother follows the 
post -vamana food plan in Chapter 7. 

Tridosha : This is a difficult disorder to heal. First 
mother and child practice emesis described above for 
Kapha. Herbs include vachd, licorice, turmeric, 
ginger, cedar, myrrh, mustd, and guduchl. 

Children are by nature more Kapha from 
drinking milk and ghee. Thus, if emetics (for 
vomiting) are needed, mild herbs and doses are given 
without oleation (oil) therapy (normally required for 
adults). Children that only nurse or those that nurse 
and eat solid food are made to vomit after they are 
content from drinking breast milk . Children who no 
longer breast feed, first drink peyd (thin gruel—see 
Chapter 7) with ghee until sated, before making them 
vomit. 

Enemas are given to children when purgative 
therapy is required (for adults) to heal a disorder. Nasal 
therapies (pratimarsha), purgation and other required 
therapies are given only to the mother. 

A paste of pippall and raw honey or paste of 
dhatakl and amalaki are applied to the ear lobes of 
the child. 

Specific Milk Therapies 

1. Abnoimal taste: One drinks Kahchanar, licorice, 
vachd (calamus) and khadir mixed in warm water. 
Paste of shatdvarl, triphald, and kut is applied locally 
on the breasts, allowed to dry and then washed off. 
This purifies the milk . 

2. Frothy: A paste of ginger, bilwa, dashmul, and 
shatdvarl with warm water is drunk. The mother or 
wet nurse takes a decoction of ginger, guduchl, 
ndgkeshar, dhatakl, lotus seed, and vachd to alleviate 
mi lk defects and apply barley, wheat, and mustard 
paste to the breasts. 

3. Rough/Drv : One drinks milk or ghee with 
shatdvarl, wild yam, vidari kand, ashwagandha, and 
bald. Paste of trikatu, prlyahgu, and amalaki is applied 
to the breasts for purification. 

4. Abnormal Color: A paste of mahjishthd, amalaki, 
shatdvarl, neem, and kulattha (horsegram) is taken 
with cold water. Apply a paste of hibiscus petals on 
the breasts. When it dries, milk is taken out. 


'V 















Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 23: Reproductive System 


5. Foul Odor: One takes a paste of triphala, turmeric, 
and calamus with cold water. Alternately, the mother 
or wet nurse takes harltakl and trikatu with honey to 
remove malodor from the milk . Other therapies in¬ 
clude eating a wholesome diet. A paste of manjishtha, 
sandalwood, neem, bibhitaki, and sarsaparilla are 
applied to the breasts. 

6. Oily: One eats a paste of musta, trikatu, dashmul, 
nagkeshar, and pnyangu. Rock salt with warm water 
is used to purify the milk . 

7. Slimy: Persons drink a decoction of haritaki, musta, 
ginger, vacha, and karahj to purify breast milk . 

8. Heavy: One drinks a decoction of guduchi, neem , 
triphala, motha (fenugreek), patha (cissampelos 
pareira, linn.), and ginger, or a paste of pippali, bald, 
ginger, chitrak, ginger is applied to the breasts for 
purification. 

All diseases require mild doses. Except for 
emergencies. Purgatives are strictly avoided. 

Additional Ceremonies 

On the sixth night rites are offered to protect the 
child from evil spirits. Parents and relatives of the 
child stay awake all night making sure the baby 
remains in a pleasant frame of mind. Certain herbs 
are placed around the birth room to protect the baby, 
and broken rice and mustard grains are spread 
throughout the house. For the next 10 days, a fire 
ceremony (yajha) is performed throughout the day. 

At the end of the 10th day, other ceremonies are 
performed. The baby is anointed with sandalwood. 
The baby is also given two names by a priest, after 
proper ceremonies. The names are chosen, based on 
the constellation (ndkshatra) the child is bom under, 
and the family name. 

If the family name starts with a 

“g, gh, j, jh, dr, drh, d, dh, b, and bh ”, 

and ends with a 

“ya, ra, la, va, sha, sa or ha,” 

the name relates to the past three generations and 
is a famous name. A name with an even number of 
letters may also be given. 


In the first 10 to 12 days after childbirth, the women 
attend to the wife, and kind and pious people are 
entertained in the house. Music, food, and drinks are 
provided for all to enjoy. 

The baby always wears auspicious amulets and 
herbs, such as brdhmi and vacha, on its hands, neck, 
and head. These bestow long life, intelligence, 
memory, health, and protection. During the sixth to 
eighth month, a ceremony is conducted to for the 
punching of the earlobes. 

A baby should not be frightened or threatened, even 
if disobedient, because spirits can take possession of 
a frightened baby. Medicated ghee made with brdhmi, 
vacha, kushthd, and myrrh bestow voice, intelligence, 
memory, and long life and protect against sins, evil 
spirits, and cures insanity from possession by spirits. 

Weaning (Stanyaparana) 

Once the baby’s teeth begin to appear, a gradual 
weaning from breast milk begins. Cow’s or goat’s 
milk are easily digestible foods and are gradually 
begun. 

Sweet balls made with raw honey, parched rice 
paddy and sugar candy develop a content baby. Bilwa 
and eld are given to kindle digestion. A nutritive drink 
(tarpana) is made with dhdtaki, parched rice paddy 
and cane sugar stops diarrhea. 


Healing Childhood Diseases 
(Balamaya Pratihedha) 

Nonverbal Communication 

A child may constantly touch (sometimes press 
hard) on its diseased parts or organs when ill. When 
another person touches that area (even gently), the 
child will cry. 

Head Disorders: If any head disease occurs, the 
child cannot raise or move its head and its eyes will 
remain closed. 

Heart: Biting the tongue and lips, difficult 
breathing, and clenching fists. 

Abdomen/Colon: Constipation vomiting, biting 
mother’s breast, intestinal gurgling, gas, bending the 
back, urine and stool retention, discolored 


.complexion, and abdominal distention. 

£4 









The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Bladder/Genitals: Urine retention, thirst, pain, 
frightened look, and occasional fainting. 

Systemic Disease (i.e., throughout the body): The 
child will cry constantly and cannot be consoled. 

Therapies 

Herbs used for specific disorders (discussed 
throughout the book) are taken in small quantities by 
the nursing mother. The child will receive the herbs 
through the milk . After the first month of the child’s 
life, a pinch of herbs is also given along with ghee. 

For children nursing and also eating foods, herbs 
are taken with food as well as given to the mother 
(dose: several pinches of herbs). When children are 
only eating food (and no longer nursing), herbs are 
given as decoctions, but not given to the mother (dose 
= 1/16 teaspoon). 

Dosing Details: From birth to one month, herbs 
should be taken with milk, honey, syrup or ghee, the 
amount of two rice grains. Then each month the size 
is gradually increased by two grains in size until the 
child is one-year-old. Thereafter the child takes about 
20 grains or 1/16 of a teaspoon until age 15. 

Elixirs: These herbs improve the health, strength, 
intellect and longevity of the child. 

Nursing: Ghee cooked with a decoction of white 
mustard seeds, vachd, apdmdrga, shatdvarl, brahmi, 
pippall, kushthd, myrrh, and rock salt. 

Nursing and Food: Ghee cooked with a decoction 
of licorice, vachd, chitrak, pippall, and triphald. 

Food (no nursing): Ghee cooked with a decoction 
of brahmi, dashmul, milk, tagara, black pepper, 
vidahga, honey, and draksha (medicated grape wine). 

[Cow’s or goat’s milk is important for the child.] 


Diseases of Growing Teeth (Dantobheda Roga) 

Ayurveda notes that all diseases can be caused by 
the eruption of new teeth, but especially fever, 
diarrhea, cough, vomiting, headache, conjunctivitis, 
herpes, and styes. The whole body can experience 
pain. Therapies are followed according to the dosha(s) 
involved. Therapies are the same as adults, only doses 
are much less. 

Medicated ghee with vachd, brihatl, laghu-pdthd, 
katukd, cane sugar, milk, and raw honey are excellent 
promoters of healthy growth of teeth. 

For all diseases arising from newly growing teeth, 
bald, atibald, bilwa, dhatakl, milk, and the watery 
portion of yogurt are used. For fever, diarrhea, difficult 
breathing, jaundice, anemia, and cough, cedar, 
pippall, brihatl, and dill are used; these herbs also 
promote strength and a healthy complexion. Once 
teeth have completely grown in, all associated 
diseases subside. 

If the child is bom with teeth or develops the upper 
teeth first (sadahta janma), a propitiatory rite is 
performed, money is donated to priests and prayers 
are offered to Naigamesha (the protector of children). 


Oversleeping During the Day (Bala Shosha) 

Excessive napping, drinking cold water or 
drinking Kapha-excessed breast milk causes the 
child’s plasma tissues ( rasa dhatu) to become blocked 
by Kapha. This results in loss of appetite, excess nasal 
mucus, fever, cough, emaciation; greasy and white 
face and eyes develop. 

Herbs to heal this condition include myrrh, vachd, 
pippall, brihatl, kdkoli, musta, vdsdk, dhatakl, and 
dmalakl mixed with honey and ghee. Ficorice, 
pippall, tdlispatra, sandalwood, and myrrh eliminate 
emaciation. Abhyahga (massage-like) and bath 
include medicated oil of vachd, tagara, and sesame 
oil. 


Vomiting 

General: Kadira, arjuna, tdlispatra, kushthd, and 
sandalwood mixed with ghee and boiled in milk. After 
Nursing: Herbs include kantkdrl, ginger, and 
raspberry. 








Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 23: Reproductive System 


Talukantaka 

Kapha becomes increased in the palate muscles, 
and the skull becomes depressed at the palate region. 
The baby develops an aversion to food, has difficulty 
suckling, and passes watery stool. Babies become 
thirsty, develop irritations in the mouth, eye pain, 
vomiting, and have difficultly holding their necks 
straight. 

Therapies call for pressing a paste of ginger, myrrh, 
and honey onto the palate. The paste of harltakl, 
vachd, kushtha, and honey are taken with breast mi lk 
to heal this disorder. 


Rectal Ulcer (Guda Vrana) 

Sweat or the sticking of feces causes an excess of 
blood and Kapha that gives rise to an ulcer. The ulcer 
is copper-colored with itching and is associated with 
secondary complications in the rectum. It is also called 
Mdtrika dosha, Ahiputana, Prishtdru, Gudakutta, and 
Andmaka. 

The mother’s breast milk needs to be purified with 
Pitta- and Kapha-reducing herbs. Herbs used for Pitta 
ulcers (Chapter 16) are boiled and then cooled, mixed 
with honey, and used as a drink. The rectum is bathed 
by sprinkling of triphald decoction and by the 
application of dry triphald powder. If redness and 
itching are severe, blood-letting is used. 


Mud-Caused Disorder 
(Mrit Bhaksanaja Roga) 

If the child has eaten mud, medicated ghee with 
musta, punarnavd, and bilwa are licked by the child. 


Therapies for the New Mother 

Some authorities suggest the first two days after 
giving birth, herbs of safflower, myrrh, and saffron 
should be taken to cleanse the uterus. Both the 
Ashtanga Hridaya and Charak Samhitd advise the 
woman to take ghee and oil (to promote fat) and 
various herbs including, pippall and chitrak. 
Sprinkling her with warm water is advised before 


eating easily digested meals (when she is hungry). She 
also receives an almond oil abhyahga (massage-like) 
and is then tightly wrapped in cloth and given Vayu- 
reducing herbs. This helps to prevent an imbalance of 
Vayu in her abdomen, stretch marks, and to help return 
the belly to its normal size. These therapies continue 
for 5 to 7 nights, then a nourishing therapy begins. 
She is served various herbs and foods to build her 
immune system and increase the flow of breast milk . 
Herbs include white musali, shatdvarl, brdhml, 
drnalakl, saffron, milk, ghee, and sesame oil. She 
remains under care for 1 1/2 months, until she begins 
her next menstrual cycle. 


Nursery 

The child’s room should be clean, beautiful, light, 
without drafts (air entering only on one side), and 
without pets. It should be comfortable and properly 
prepared for the season (i.e., blankets in the winter, 
air cooling in the summer). Antiseptic aromas lik e 
guggul, frankincense, and cedar are burnt to fumigate 
the room and fabrics. The child is given talismans of 
jewels, and herbs to wear. There should be a variety 
of toys of many colors and sounds. The child should 
not be frightened or disciplined. 


Miscarriage 

Traditionally it was believed that girls under age 
16 and boys under age 25 involved in conceiving a 
child were more likely to have a miscarriage or have 
a child with weak organs. The signs of impending 
miscarriage are pain in the uterus, bladder, waist, 
groin; and bleeding. 

To prevent miscarriage, the person immediately 
receives cold baths, cold water spraying, and 
medicated plaster, followed by drinking boiled mi lk 
with licorice and ashwagandha. If there are unusual 
movements of the fetus in the womb, one drinks mi lk 
boiled with white lotus (punclarlka), white water lily 
(kumuda), and licorice. 

Fetus displacement causes pain or spasms, burn¬ 
ing, excessive discharge of blood or retention of urine 
and stool. When the fetus shifts from place to place it 





The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


causes abdominal swelling. In both cases cooling and 
soothing therapies are required. 

For pain : Boiled milk with licorice flower and 
kantkdri mixed with cane sugar and honey is drunk. 

For stool retention or distention : Boiled milk with 
cisafoetida, salt, garlic, vachd is mixed with raw honey 
and cane sugar and drunk. Other conditions follow 
therapies discussed in their respective chapters. 

In the event of a miscarriage, herbal 
emmenagogues are used to cleanse the uterus, 
including aloe vera gel, myrrh, turmeric, and 
mahjishthd. This therapy continues for 1 to 2 weeks. 
Rest is essential to recover from the loss. 


Childhood Planetary Influences 
(Grahakriti-Vijnanan) 

There are 9 diseases of infancy exist related to 
the 9 planets (grcihci), Skanda-graha, Skanda- 
pasmara, shakuni, Revati, Putand, Andha-putana, 
shita-putand, Mukhamandikd, Naigamesha 
(pritigraha). 


complexion, fever with an inflamed mouth, bruising 
pain all over the body, and will frequently mb the 
nose and ears. Putand: Foose limbs, troubled day or 
night sleep, loose stools, body odor, vomiting, goose 
bumps, thirst. 

Andha-putana: Aversion to breast milk, develop 
dysentery, cough, hiccups, vomiting, fever, a 
discolored complexion, swollen skin, and will always 
he face down. 

Shita-putand: Constantly frightened and startled, 
excess shivering, comatose sleep, constant diarrhea, 
body odor. 

Mukha-mandikd: Incessant crying, intestinal 
rumbling, emaciation, shiny, swollen lines of the face 
and body, fearful, large appetite, net-like abdominal 
veins, a urine-like odor. 

Naigamesha-graha: Frothy vomit, bent over, anxious, 
crying loudly, gazing upwards, emaciation or fever, 
body odor, fainting. 

If a child appears stupefied, with aversion to breast 
milk, constant fainting spells, and full development 
of all symptoms, the situation is grave and not 
healable. When symptoms are milder or of more 
recent origin, healing is possible. 


Causes: These diseases result from improper breast 
feeding, poor hygiene, cruel treatment, and a poor 
spiritual environment. During these times the 
planetary (evil) spirits enter the child. 

Symptoms: 

Skanda graha: Swollen eyes, distorted facial features, 
aversion to breast milk . 

Skanda-pasmara-graha: The child’s body emits a 
bloody smell, one eyelid becomes motionless. It has 
a frightened look, clenches fists with slight moans, 
rolls the eyes, is constipated and subject to fainting 
fits, convulsive leg and hand jerks, foaming mouth, 
yawning, passing gas while excreting stool and urine. 
Shakuni: Foose limbs, body odor. 

Revati: The child is filled with terror, secreting ulcers 
or vessel eruption with burning sensation all over the 
body (which eventually develop pus and burst of their 
own nature). The child will have a reddish face, green 
stool and urine, deep yellow or dark brown 


Origins of the Nine Planets (Grahas) 
[Grahotpatti-Adhyaya] 

The nine presiding deities (of the nine infant 
diseases) are ethereal. They were created by the gods 
Agni, Mahadeva (Shiva), the goddess Krittikd and 
Umd, for guarding the newborn god, Guha. Newborns 
need to be guarded for approximately 40 days. The 
female deities were created from the essence of the 
goddess Gangd, Umd, and Krittikd. 

The Naigamesha graha has the face of a sheep 
and was created by the goddess Pdrvati as the friend 
and protector of the child Guha. 



















Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 23: Reproductive System 


Skandapasmara was created by Agni (the fire god). 
He is as bright as fire, and a constant companion of 
the god Skanda. He is also known as Kartik and 
Vishakha. Skanda, bom of Shiva and Pdrvati, is also 
known as Kumara (lit. a child, viz., of Shivaji). Skanda 
is known as the Divine Warrior, the ensurer of Di¬ 
vine love. 

The deities of the nine childhood diseases asked 
Skanka how they will survive. Skanda looked to his 
father, Shiva for the answer. Mahadeva answered, 

‘Gods, men, and animals live under the principle 
of give and take; they are linked by the bonds of 
service to one another. The gods minister to the needs 
of humans and animals by ruling the seasons of the 
year and by controlling the rain and air. 

‘Humans return the favor by propitiating the gods 
through meditation, prayer, offerings. All services and 
their compensation between the gods and humans 
are complete, so there is nothing left for you. 
Therefore, your means of sustenance will be in the 
life of an infant. It is true that this form of 
compensation will be tainted with the tears of the 
anxious and haggard parents.’ 

‘Thus, the children of the fa mi lies in which the 
gods, ancestors (Pitris), the Brahmans, pious, 
preceptors, elders, and guests are not properly 
worshipped, respected and served, where the rules of 
cleanliness and virtues are not observed, when the 
family members do not make daily offerings to the 
gods and donate money and food to the less fortunate, 
and those who eat food that belongs to others, are the 
proper persons whom you can strike with impunity, 
and by your malefic influence, cause them these 
childhood diseases. 

‘It is your duty to see that the payment of the 
parents’ iniquities appears in their children. The 
parents will be forced to worship you and give you 
offerings, to return the childrens’ health. Thus, you 
will have ample sustenance.’ 

The nine grahas (planetary deities) accepted these 
words. These childhood diseases are difficult to heal. 
When disease is caused by Skanda, the most dreadful 
of all the planets, there may be permanent damage, 
even if the child is healed. If a fully developed disorder 
occurs from any of the other planets, the disease will 


be incurable. 

This planetary section may sound less scientific 
and more mythological. For this reason, it may be 
more difficult to believe, or at least, harder to 
understand. Simply put, to prevent childhood diseases 
(and all diseases), five ethically, virtuously, cleanly, 
and spiritually according to your own path. Be kind, 
generous, charitable, gentle, and always make time 
to meditate or pray according to your own spiritual 
beliefs. 


Therapies 

General: The child should be kept in a clean and 
purified room, and massaged with ghee. Mustard 
seeds are spread on the floor and a mustard oil lamp 
is constantly fit. Cardamom, sesame and barley, and 
sandalwood are constantly placed in the fire with 
garlands of flowers. Mantras are also constantly 
recited, “Reverence to thee, lord of the fire, honor to 
thee, goddess Krittika, obeisance to thee, lord Skanda, 
reverence to thee, lord who has cast this malefic effect. 
In deep respect and humility, I beseech your favor. 
May my child be rid of this disease, make (him/her) 
strong and healthy again.” 

Skanda-graha: 

Herbs: Decoctions of bilwa, ashwagandha, bald, 
cardamom, yogaraj guggul, and other Vayu-reducing 
herbs are sprinkled on the child’s body. The same 
herbs, along with sesame oil, guduchl are used to 
massage the body. Ghee cooked with cedar and 
fran ki ncense is mixed with milk and ingested. 

Offerings: Mustard seeds, vachd, frankincense, cedar, 
ghee are burnt and the smoke is used to cover the 
child’s body. Bilwa, guduchl, and anantmul are stmng 
together and worn as a necklace. The person taking 
care of the child bathes in the night (chanting the 
Gdyatrl mantra). They pray to lord Skanda for three 
consecutive nights, offering red flower garlands, 
saffron or rose incense, grains, and rice. Bells are rung. 

Mantras: Daily prayers to Skanda (the Divine warrior) 
are said, 













The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


“May the eternal, changeless Skanda, the receptacle 
of all energies gained by austerities, fame, valor, or 
vital energy be favorable to thee (the child). May 
almighty Gului, head of the army of the gods, planetary 
lords, and destroyer of their enemies, protect thee from 
all evils. May he who is the son of the supreme, whose 
mothers are Gangd, Uma, and the Krittikas give thee 
health and comfort. May the beautiful god who with a 
single shaft, pierced the heart of mountain Krouncha 
and who is resplendent with red rays of his own divine 
person, smeared with red sandalwood paste and 
wearing red flower garlands, protect thee from all 
dangers.” 


Skandd-pasmard Prcitishedha: 

A bdwa leaf decoction subdues Vayu. Sprinkling 
with this decoction is useful. An oil decoction of bilwa 
root with herbs from the sarvagandha group (i.e., 
aromatic herbs like sandalwood, tulsl, guggul, frank¬ 
incense) neem, and gudiichi is pasted on the child’s 
body. 

Fumigation: Mustard seed, vachd, and ghee are 
burned around the body of the child. Twigs of gucluchl 
and bilwa thorns are strung on a necklace and put 
around the child’s neck. Anantmiil, sandalwood, 
guggul, and tulsl aromas are used. Whoever is caring 
for the child should bathe nightly and meditate to 
Skanda, the ruler of Mars, for three successive nights 
in the inner area of the child’s house. The bath water 
should be purified by reciting the Gdyatrl Mantra 

Aum bhur bhuvaha swaha; Tat savitur warenyam; 
Bhargo devasya dhl mahi; Dhiyo yo nah prachidayat 

Red-flower garlands, red flags, and red oils (e.g., 
kumkum) are offered in prayer. Fresh barley and rice 
are also offered. Bells are rung and sacred fires are lit 
with 3, 7, or 10 pourings of ghee. 

Mantra: Daily recitation protects the body from 
this malefic planet. “May Skancld, the eternal and 
changeless deity who is the receptacle of all sorts of 
energies produced by austerities, fame, valor or vital 
energy be propitious to thee. May almighty Gului (the 


commander-in-chief of gods and planets) protect thee 
from all evils. He is the destroyer of the enemy of the 
gods. May he who is the son of the supreme deity, 
the god of the gods, and who acknowledges the ex¬ 
alted motherhood of Gangd, Uma, and the Krittikas, 
give thee health and comfort. May the beautiful god 
who pierced with a single shaft right through the heart 
of the mountain Krouncha and who is effulgent with 
red rays of his own divine person smeared with the 
paste of red sandalwood and decked with the garland 
of red flowers protect thee from all perils.” 


Skandapasmara-Pratishedha: 

A decoction of bilwa is sprinkled over the body. 
Medicated oils of the sarvagandha herb group (i.e., 
aromatics) are smeared on the body. Ghee cooked 
with milk and a decoction of the barks of kshlrl trees, 
and herbs from the shatdvari, ashwagandha, and 
licorice are made into a paste and are eaten. 

The child’s body is rubbed with vachd and hihg 
paste. Fumigation with the aromatic herbs (i.e., bilwa, 
sandalwood, guggul). A bracelet of sandalwood, tulsl, 
ruclraksha, or anantmiil is worn by the child. The 
child’s caretaker, observing a fast, sits in a ditch and 
offers milk and grains (food stuff). The child is bathed 
at a crossroads while a mantra is recited: 

“O thou, the trusted and beloved friend of god 
Skanda, O Skancldpas-mdra, O thou ugly-faced one 
whom the world knows by the epithet of Visdkha, 
may good befall this child in distress.” 


Shakuni-Pratishedha: 

The child’s body is sprinkled with a decoction of 
kapittha and dmra (mango). An oil decoction, using 
sweet and astringent herbs, is used to anoint the body. 
Plasters of madhuka, utpala, pnyahgu, mahjishthd, 
and sarsaparilla are pasted on the child. 

Herbs and foods discussed in the ulcers section 
and the fumigation described above for Skanda-gralui 
are also used here. Shatdvari, nagadanti (heliotrope), 
kantkdii, lakshmana, and vrihati (Indian nightshade) 
are worn as a charm by the child. 










Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 23: Reproductive System 


Skanda, the ruler of Mars is meditated on by the 
practitioner in a beech arbor. He is offered huskless 
sesame seeds and flower garlands. The child is bathed 
in the arbor as discussed under Skanda Graha. 
Medicated ghee used for Skanda Graha is also used. 

Flowers are offered to Skanda, and a mantra is 
recited, 

“May the ever down-looking sharp-beaked, keen 
and farseeing-eyed goddess (Shakuni is decked with 
a variety of ornaments) and who traverses the ethereal 
sky in her flight, be propitious to thee. May the brown¬ 
eyed, fierce-looking, huge-bodied, large-bellied and 
spike-eared Shakuni, who strikes terror into the hearts 
of people with her terrible voice, be pleased with thee.” 


Revati-Pratishedha: 

A decoction of ashwagandha, sarsaparilla, 
punarnavd, and both sahd and vidarl kand are 
sprinkled on the child’s body. Medicated oil of 
kushthd, guggul, and khus-khus are anointed on the 
body. Medicated ghee cooked with lotus, dhatala, and 
ashwagandha, shatdvan, and licorice herbs are taken 
internally. 

Burnt kulattha (horse gram), powdered conch shell 
(shank bhasma), and herbs from the sarvagandha 
group (aromatic herbs) are applied as a plaster. The 
child’s body is fumigated morning and evening with 
barley, yava-phala (barley). A necklace is made for 
the child from varuna, neem , or nirgundl. 

The planetary ruler of this disease is Revati, who 
is meditated on in a cow bam by the practitioner. 
White flowers, milk , and boiled rice should be offered. 
The nurse and child are both bathed in the junction 
of rivers. A mantra is recited: 

“May the goddess Revati, of dark complexion, 
who is clad in brightly colored clothes, with garlands 
of multicolored flowers, and is anointed with various 
aromas and with oscillating earrings, be pleased with 
thee. May the goddess Revati, who is tall, drooping 
and terrible looking, and who is the mother of many 
sons be always propitious to thee.” 


Putana-Pratishedha: 

The child is washed with a decoction of the barks 
of varuna, paribhadraka, and dsphotd Medicated oil 
made with a decoction of vachd, brdhmi, and kushthd 
is used to anoint the child’s body. 

Ghee is cooked with kushthd, khadira, 
sandalwood, licorice, shatdvan, and ashwagandha. 
Cedar, vachd, kushthd, hihg, and aromatic herbs are 
used to fumigate the child’s body. A bracelet made of 
wild licorice other aromatic herbs is worn by the child. 

The ruler of this planetary disease, Putand, is 
meditated on in a lonely room. Offerings include 
boiled rice and sesame butter. They are placed on a 
saucer and covered. The child is bathed with the water 
used with the offerings. 

The mantra recited is, 

“May the slovenly shag-haired goddess, Putand, 
who is dressed in dirty clothes and who loves to haunt 
lonely places, preserve this child. May the fierce- 
looking frightful goddess, who is as black as a dark 
rain cloud, who loves to haunt lonely and dilapidated 
human dwellings, and whose body gives off filthy 
odors, protect the child from all evils.” 

Andha-putana-Pratishedha: 

A decoction of bitter trees (i.e., neem or 
chirayata) is used to sprinkle on the child’s body. 
Wine, rice vinegar, kushd, and haritala should be used 
with medicated oil. Medicated ghee is made from a 
decoction of pippali, ashwagandha, shatdvan, vicldrl 
kand, licorice, and raw honey (added after cooking). 

A plaster of aromatic herbs is applied to the child’s 
body. The eyes are soothed with cold water. 
Fumigation is conducted with aromatic herbs. The 
child wears a necklace of shimbi, anatdmul, mango, 
neem, and other aromatic herbs. 

The practitioner makes an offering of food at the 
cross roads or inside the house. The child and nurse 
are bathed with a decoction of aromatic herbs. The 
following mantra used chanted: 

“May the dreadful, brown-colored, bald-headed 
goddess Andha-putana, wearing red-colored clothes, 
be pleased to save this child.” 








The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Shita-putana-Pratishedha: 

A decoction of kapittha, bilwa, and bhalldtaka are 
used to sprinkle on the child’s body. Musta, cedar, 
kushthd, and aromatic herbs are used as a medicated 
oil. Medicated ghee is made with three parts of a 
decoction of the herbs rohini, khadira, paldsd, arjuna 
bark, and one part milk . Neem, licorice bilwa, and 
mango are used for fumigating the child. Gunja (wild 
licorice), tulsi, sandalwood, and other aromatic herbs 
are worn as a bracelet by the child. 

The ruler Shitaputand, is meditated on, and 
offered rice and mudga (mungdal) (cooked together). 
Wine is also offered. The child is bathed near a river, 
pond, or pool. The mantra recited is, 

“May the goddess Shita-putand, who is fond of 
rice and mung (mudga), who delights in drinking 
wine, and who resides by the side of rivers, preserve 
thee.” 


Mukha-mandika-Pratishedha: 

A decoction of kapittha, bilwa, vamsha lochana, 
jayanti, erand, and pdtald are used to sprinkle on the 
child. Oil and ghee (in equal parts) is cooked with 
the juice of bhrihgardj, ashwagandha, and shatavari 
and anointed on the child’s body. Medicated ghee is 
made with dashmul and mi lk. 

Fumigation with vachd, kushthd, and other 
aromatic herbs and mixed with ghee is ingested by 
the child. A bracelet of sandalwood, tulsi, rudraksha, 
or anantmul is also worn. The ruler is offered food in 
a cow bam. The child is bathed with water that the 
mantra was recited over. The mantra is, 

“May the beautiful and blessed goddess 
Mukhamandika, who wears ornaments, who can 
assume different forms at will and who resides in 
cow bams, preserve thee.” 


Naigamesha-Pratishedha: 

A decoction of bilwa, agnimantha (clerodendron 
p. or premna integrifolia), sarvira (sarsaparilla), and 
whey are sprinkled on the child’s body. A medicated 


oil is made with prlyahgu, anantamul, and shata- 
pushpa (fennel) with yogurt whey and anointed on 
the child. Medicated ghee is made with madhura 
herbs, dashmul decoction, and mi lk. 

The child wears the same bracelet advised for 
Skandapasmara. White mustard seed, vachd, hihg, 
kushthd, parched rice, bhalldtaka, and ajamoda are 
used for fumigating the child’s body. Huskies sesame 
seeds, garlands of flowers, and various foods are 
offered to Naigamesha, the preserver of the child, at 
the base of a banyan tree on the sixth day of the 
fortnight. The child is bathed there also. 

The mantra recited is, 

“May the far-famed god, Naigamesha, the 
preserver of children, who has a goat’s face with 
moving brow and rolling eyes and who can assume 
different forms at will, preserve the child.” 


Male Reproductive System (Punster) 


Defective Semen 

Cause: Excess sex or sex at the wrong times, 
masturbation, exercise, unsuitable foods, eating an 
excess of rough, bitter, astringent, salty, sour and hot 
foods, old age, anxiety, grief, suspicion, fear, anger, 
exorcism, emaciation from disease, suppression of 
natural urges, and wounds can lead to the 
derangement of doshas and tissues. This can reach 
the semen-carrying channels, causing semen defects. 

Semen is considered normal when it is oily, 
viscous, non-slimy, sweet, non-burning, and white. 

Symptoms: Defective semen is frothy, thin, rough, 
discolored, slimy, malodorous, combined with other 
tissues and premature. 

Vdyu: Air afflicts the semen causing frothy, thin and 
rough, semen that is difficult to ejaculate (impotence). 
Pitta : Fire affecting the semen is blue or yellowish, 












Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 23: Reproductive System 


very hot, malodorous, and bums when ejaculated. 

Kapha: Water obstmcts the passage of semen making 
it slimy. 

Excessive Coitus , Injury , Wound: Bloody semen 
develops. 

Suppression of Urges: This causes Vayu to obstruct 
the passage of semen, making it difficult to ejaculate, 
feel knotted, or ejaculate prematurely. 

Therapies: Herbs with the properties of aphrodisiacs 
are used, such as shildjit, shatdvan, ashwagandha, 
kapikachhu, and vidarl-kand. For bleeding, red 
raspberry, shatdvan, musta, mahjishthd, gotu kola, 
aloe vera gel, and bhrihgardj are used. Pitta-reducing 
foods, drinks and lifestyle are advised. 

Vayu: Herbs include shatdvan, ashwagandha, 
kapikachhu, vidarl-kand, sesame seeds, and almonds. 
Non-oily enemas arc also used. 

Pitta : Shatdvan and bald are used. 

Kapha: Pippall, arjuna, and triphald are suggested. 
Foods: Ghee, milk, barley, rice, and wheat are advised. 


female tract malodor. Further causes include a defective 
tract, excessive discharge, chronic illness in women, 
with animals, not washing the penis, and injured 
genitals. 

Senility: Old age often causes diminished semen 
related to a deficiency of the seven tissues, not using 
aphrodisiacs, gradual loss of strength, energy, motor 
and sensory organs; poor nutrition, physical exertion, 
and mental exhaustion. This results in depleted tissues, 
debilitation, poor complexion, and poor resistance to 
disease. 

Deficiency: From excess mental work, grief, fear, 
anxiety, envy, curiosity, intoxication, agitation, 
habitual rough and emaciating diet and herbs, fasting, 
or insufficient amounts of plasma-foods by weak 
persons. The diminished rasa causes deficiency in 
other tissues (dhatus). This results in low resistance 
to disease and can be life-threatening. 


Impotency (Viryalpata) 

Causes: Loss or deficiency of semen and penile 
strength and senility. 

Defective Seed: This results from ingesting cold, 
rough, mixed, incompatible, uncooked or insufficient 
food, fasting, grief, anxiety, fear, terror, and sexual 
intercourse. Other causes include exorcism, suspicion, 
deficient plasma, dosha excesses, exertion, faulty 
application of pahcha karma, and impaired semen. 
These conditions are associated with pale complexion, 
weakness, low vitality, erection difficulty, heart 
problems, anemia, bronchial asthma, jaundice, 
exhaustion, vomiting, diarrhea, colic, fever, and 
cough. 

Penile Weakness: This results from ingesting excess 
sour, salty, heavy, incompatible and unsuitable foods, 
drinking excess water, or overeating pastries. Other 
causes are irregular meals, meats, excess yogurt or 
milk, weakness from illness, coitus with a female 
child, not in vagina, with lust, during menses, or 


Therapies: General 

Excess Sex, Dosha Imbalance: Enemas, ghee, semen- 
promoting herbs, such as shatdvan, ashwagandha, 
bald, and kapikachhu are suggested. 

Exorcism: Spiritual measures are used. 

Impotence: Therapies should be administered in this 
order: unction, fomentation, and oil purgative (e.g., 
castor oil). Next, a proper meal should be eaten. Later 
non-oil enemas and oil enemas are used. Non-oil 
enemas include the herbs, musta, patha, guduchi, 
bald, punarnava, mahjishthd, prishindernl, and 
kantkdrl. The best oil enema to use is shi goal oil. 
The ingredients of shi goal oil are black pepper, hihgu, 
saffron, and viola (cotton plant seed) herbs with 
Spanish jasmine oil. A sustained enema containing 
mastoid herbs is also suggested. Lastly, semen- 
promoting herbs such as shatdvan, ashwagandha, 
bald, and kapikachhu are taken. The oil enema 
promotes strength. Eating proper foods gives strength 
and energy. In the same way, oil enemas restore 
strength and energy to the local area and to the whole 
body through colon absorption. 


























The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Loss of penile strength: Anointing the genitals with 
oil, sprinkling or blood-letting is used. Persons take 
sesame oil, ghee, castor oil purgatives and enemas, 
then non-oil enemas. Lastly, se-men-promoting herbs, 
such as shatavarl, ashwa-gandha, bald, kapikachhu, 
and dmalaki are ingested. 

Senility & Semen Deficiency: Therapies include 
unction and fomentation, oil purgatives and enemas. 
This is followed with ghee and semen promoting 
herbs, such as shatavarl, ashwagandha, bald, 
kapikachhu, guggul, shildjit, and sesame or castor 
oil enemas. 

Vdyu: Deficient semen. Therapies include ghee, 
sesame seeds, almonds, cooked garlic and onions; 
semen-promoting herbs, such as shatavarl, 
ashwagandha, bald, kapikachhu, dmalaki, guggul, 
and shildjit. 

Pitta : Burning semen. Herbs include aloe vera gel, 
shatavarl, dmalaki, milk, sugar, and ghee. 

Kapha: Loss of interest in sex, obesity, excess mucus, 
desiring sugar as a substitute for sex. Herbs include 
pippall, garlic, cloves, trikatu, guggul, and shildjit. 


Enlarged Prostate (Vatashthila) 

(see also Chapter 18) 

Causes: This results from aging, excessive sexual 
intercourse, and suppression of ejaculation. 

Symptoms and Therapies: 

General: Gokshura, ashwagandha, and shildjit are 
advised. 

Vdyu: Symptoms include low back pain, low energy, 
and constipation. Therapies include Vayu-reducing 
foods, cooked garlic and onions, bald, kapikachhu, 
guggul, gokshura, and ashwagandha. 

Pitta : Symptoms include infection, swelling, fever, 
and dark yellow or red urine. Therapies include Pitta- 
reducing foods, gokshura, punamavd, ashwagandha, 


lemon grass, and chyavan prash. 

Kapha: This results from water retention and excess 
phlegm. Kapha-reducing foods, ginger, cinnamon, 
shildjit, and guggul are advised. 


Venereal Diseases (Upadamsha) 

Genital Herpes, Syphilis, Gonorrhea 

Causes: External injury, lack of cleanliness, excessive 
sexual intercourse, or contact with a diseased vagina. 
Generally this is a Pitta-excess disease, involving heat 
in the liver. Pitta moves through the liver channels to 
the urogenital region. Impure blood and excess bile 
may clog the area, causing an accumulation of stress, 
anger, and anxiety. 

Symptoms: 

Vdyu: Dry skin, constipation, small, blackish painful 
and hard pimples; low energy, and insomnia. 

Pitta: Lever, thirst, red or black, swollen or painful 
pimples that exude yellowish fluid; burning sensation, 
pimples that discharge blood, and irritability. 

Kapha: Pimples that exude white fluid, swelling, 
itching, slight redness and pain, phlegm accumulates 
in the body. 

Tridosha: Muscular tissue sprouts (resembling a 
rooster’s crown), developing inside the foreskin, at 
the junction of the glands or nearby; accompanied 
with pain and exudation. This is difficult to heal. 

Therapies: 

General: Sarsaparilla, gotu kola. 

Vdyu: Vayu-reducing foods, milk, ghee, aloe vera gel, 
turmeric, barberry, sandalwood, gotu kola, 
ashwagandha, shatavarl, and bald. 

Pitta: Pitta-reducing foods, raw vegetables, mungdal, 
basmati rice, milk, ghee; avoiding hot spices, alcohol, 
sour, salty foods, sugar, and avoiding stress. Herbs to 
cleanse the blood and liver include coriander or 
























Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 23: Reproductive System 


cilantro, parsley, manjishtha, musta, bhuamalaki, 
gokshura, aloe vera gel, punarnava, shatavari, 
katukd, and sandalwood. Sex should be reduced, and 
rest is required. Sandalwood and coconut oil body 
abhyanga (massage-like) is important. Purgation is 
also useful. Sores are washed with chitrak, turmeric, 
and sarsaparilla. 


Kapha: Liver-cleansing herbs, such as aloe vera gel, 
chitrak, turmeric, with hot spices like ginger, pippall, 
cloves, and trikatu. 

Females: Aloe gel, myrrh, saffron, safflower, and 
other menstrual herbs (see female genital tract 
section). 

Tridosha: Therapies for all three doshas. 










The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 





J MjdxrLcmljcjCLL W+LiLthS- 















Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 24: Immune System 


Persons should not engage in occupations that are lacking, or going contrary to the three 
pursuits; righteousness; wealth, and pleasure...one should be moderate and avoid extremes 

Ashtanga Hridayam Sii. Ch. 2: ver. 30 


Chapter 24 
Immune System 
HIV/AIDS, Epstein Barr 


mmune system disorders are becoming more 
prevalent as modem society becomes faster 
paced, orients itself more toward high tech¬ 
nology, and departs from nature’s rhythms and nutri¬ 
tional living. Technology itself is not an inherent evil. 
Rather, it is the imbalance, the overreliance or the 
idea of conquering nature, rather than learning to live 
in harmony with it, that tips the scales toward an arti¬ 
ficial or destructive lifestyle. 

Ayurveda is aware of an immune system essence 
or life-sap. This life-sap is called ojas, and has been 
discussed throughout this book. It is this sap that cov¬ 
ers and protects the immune system from harm. Ojas 
can be l ik ened to the sap of a tree. When the bark of 
a healthy tree is cut, the sap oozes over the cut and 
slowly hardens. Eventually the cut is healed and the 
bark grows once again. Analogously, when some for¬ 
eign body attacks the immune system, the ojas or 
fife-sap covers, protects, and eventually repairs the 
damage. Healthy immune systems having an ample 
supply of ojas can even protect the system, keeping 
it healthy at all times. 

Many of today’s habits quickly deplete the im¬ 
mune system’s ojas. Excess travel, overworking to 
the point of burnout, eating junk food, and excess 
sexual intercourse—to cite a few noxious influ¬ 
ences—all overtax the system and deplete the sup¬ 
ply of ojas. Mental stress can also overtax the ner¬ 
vous system, and cause a depletion of ojas. Excess 
worry, fear, anger, and impatience can dry or bum up 
ojas. Thus, immune system disorders are caused by 
both mental and physical lifestyle factors. 

In contrast to these ojas-depleting life-styles, 
Mother Nature, being all-providing, has provided 



various foods, herbs, colors, gems, and mantras that 
have ojas -building properties: organic milk and yo¬ 
gurt, ghee, whole cane sugar, maple syrup and raw 
honey, almonds and sesame seeds are all natural foods 
that are known to build ojas. 

The gold ash formula, Survana Vasant Malti is 
excellent for all immune disorders—1 pill in the 
morning with 1/2 tsp. honey. For extreme immune 
weakness (e.g., AIDS) a second pill can be taken in 
the evening. In rare cases, some heartburn may occur. 
For this, avipattikar churna is used as needed. 

Dairy : Milk is drunk after it is boiled and cooled. 
Whole sugars and ghee are added to the milk . The 
mi lk is drunk early in the morning or just before bed 
(without other foods). Yogurt water (lassi) is dmnk 
with meals or between meals. 

Nuts/Seeds : After a few almonds are soaked 
overnight, the s ki n should be peeled before the nuts 
are eaten. Sesame seeds, in the form of tahini (sesame 
butter), are easy to digest. 

Herbs: Ashwagandha andshatdvarl are two common 
q/as-boosting herbs. Cardamom or cinnamon may 
be added to aid digestion of these heavier herbs. 
Gems : Diamonds and yellow stones such as citrine 
boost ojas in the body. 

Colors: These balance physical health by blanching 
mental health. Gold strengthens the immune system 
and ojas. 

Aromatherapy: Aromas l ik e lotus, rose, frankincense, 
and sandalwood help to boost ojas while calming the 
mind. ' 











The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Mantras: The best mantra is the one given by one’s 
personal spiritual guru (guide). Since many people 
do not have such an opportunity, Ayurveda offers 
mantras that heal the mind and body. Aum, Ram, and 
Klim increase ojas. 

Mental Peace: The health of the mind affects the 
health of the body: shiro clhard (warm oil flow on the 
head) relaxes the mind, nerves, and immune system, 
providing individuals with a profound state of rest. 
In this state, deep-seated stresses and diseases may 
be released. 

Spiritual Lifestyle: Reading scriptures, listening to 
spiritual music, helping others, meditating, eating 
properly, and working at a job one loves are examples 
of life-styles that heal the mind and body and boost 
ojas. 


HIV/AIDS 

In an ancient Ayurvedic text, Madhava Nidan, 
written around 700 A.D., the author, Madhavakara 
foretells a disease that will come to India. From its 
description, we know it as HIV/A ID S. Its cure was 
said to be shilajit. 

Causes: The main cause is deficient life-sap (ojas), 
which causes an extremely weakened immune 
system. When one has sufficient ojas, the HIV virus 
cannot develop. Ojas is lost or diminished by excess 
sex, improper diet, junk food, drugs, excess worry, 
thinking, and insomnia. 

Symptoms: Vayu and Pitta are primary factors, but 
Kapha may present symptoms of congestion and lung 
disorders. 

Vayu: Weakness, low energy, nerve disorders, 
constipation, anxiety, worry, fear, dry skin, vertigo, 
palpitations, and nervous system disorders, such as 
neuropathy. 

Pitta : Blood, skin, and liver problems; nervous system 
disorders caused by heating, burning, diarrhea, fever, 
anger, impatience, and low energy-burnout. An 
inflamed tongue (oral candida/yeast). 


Kapha: (complications—not a primary cause of HIV/ 
AIDS) Congestion, mucus, and lung disorders. A 
white-coated tongue (oral candida/yeast). 


Therapies: 

1) The main herb suggested in Madhava Nidan is 
shilajit (tridoshic—for all doshas). It boosts the 
immune system (ojas) and is antiviral. 

2) Vavu/Immune boosting herbs . Shatdvarl, 
ashwagandha, kapikachhu and chyavan prdsh build 
the ojas and balance Vayu. 

3) Pitta reducing herbs. 

A) Blood purifiers—gotu kola, mahjishthd, 
turmeric. 

B) Liver cleansers—gentle herbs are used if Vayu 
is also high (i.e., weak or emaciated). They include 
gotu kola, bhrihgardj, musta ,and sandalwood 
(antibacterial/antiseptic). When persons are strong but 
still have infections, purpura (or other skin disorders), 
then stronger liver herbs, such as bhudmalaki and 
katukd, may be administrated. 

C) Gokshura may be used to treat burning or 
infections of the urinary tract. It is also good for 
seminal debility and nerve disorders. 

D) Herbal antibiotics like guduchl and turmeric 
can also be used to treat infections. 

4) Kapha-reducing herbs. Hot spices are used to treat 
congestion. 

5) Antiviral herbs. In small doses, or when mixed 
with Vayu-reducing herbs, jasmine is a gentle antiviral 
herb. Shilajit also has antiviral properties, but is not 
used if the uric acid count is high. 

A Vayu- or Pitta-reducing diet and lifestyle are 
required; spicy, sour, bitter, and astringent tastes are 
not recommended. Foods that are wholesome, pure 
(sattwic), and p/V/.v-building are used (e.g., sesame 
oil and seeds, almonds, chick-peas, boiled milk, 
yogurt/water, and ghee). Sesame oil should be applied 
externally. Brdhml and sandalwood oil should be 



















Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 24: Immune System 


applied on the head. Shiro dhara is efficacious in 
relaxing the nervous system and boosting the immune 
system. Sex is also to be avoided because it drains 
the body of ojas. 

G/Av-boosting mantras include Aum, Shum, and 
Shrim. Yellow stones, moonstone, and pearl all in¬ 
crease ojas. 

Thrush: 

Coriander or fennel (1/8 tsp.) between meals. 


Epstein-Barr Virus/ Chronic 
Fatigue Syndrome 

Western medicine describes Epstein-Barr Vi¬ 
ms (EBV) (Chronic Fatigue Syndrome) as a ubiqui¬ 
tous herpes vims related to B-lymphocytes and the 
nasal and pharynx cells. Ayurveda suggests that this 
low-grade infection is caused by a depleted immune 
system, as discussed earlier in the introduction to this 
chapter. Western medicine suggests that primary EBV 
infection occurs in people of all ages. Fifty percent 
of children under the age of five may possibly carry 
EBV, but it is almost always in a dormant stage. 

In the past decade or so a pattern of EBV has been 
seen in adults, ages 20 - 40. The symptoms include 
fatigue, low-grade fever, mild thinking 


dysfunction, and lymphadenopathy (lymph node in¬ 
flammation that can lead to diseases related to the 
lymphoid system). 

Although EBV is sometimes called Chronic 
Fatigue Syndrome, the symptoms are not always the 
same. 

Therapies: Generally, this is viewed as a Pitta excess, 
often caused by burnout and overwork. Ayurveda 
recommends a two-fold therapeutic approach. 

1) Immune-boosting herbs that do not aggravate 
Pitta (e.g., shatavan, shildjit). 

2) Pitta-reducing herbs to reduce infection and 
virus, and cleanse the blood, fiver, gall bladder, spleen, 
and lymphoid system (e.g., mahjishthd, turmeric, 
bhudmalaki, katukd, yellow dock, and bhrihgardj). 

A Pitta-reducing diet and lifestyle are also 
essential for healing and rejuvenation. 


Fibromyalgia 

This is another condition that has become 
prevalent in more recent years. Therapies include yoga 
postures, shiro dhara, abhyahga, mahdndrdyan oil 
for pain, and survana vasant main (gold) pills as an 
immune booster. Other herbs include shatdvari and 
ashwagandha. This condition takes a long time to 
heal. 












The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 







Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 25: Metabolic System 


Being mindful of the nature of people, 
deal with them in a way that best pleases them. 
Become well versed in the art of adoring others. 

Ashtanga Hridayam Su. Ch. 2: ver. 26-28 

Chapter 25 
Metabolic System 

Edema, Tonsillitis, Gingivitis, Dental Abscess, 
Goiter, Hypo/Hyperthyroid, Gout, Thirst 


Edema (Shopha or &hotha) 
Non-Inflammatory 

auses: General causes occur from increased 
doshas. All three doshas are involved in 
the development of all three types of edema 
(Vayu, Pitta, and Kapha), yet the predominating 
dosha determines what dosha should be balanced. 
Specific causes result from debilitating diseases, fast¬ 
ing, sudden overeating, or unhealthy foods. Other 
causes include eating foods that are hard to digest, 
fatty, heavy, hot, sharp, cold, salty, or from excessive 
use of diuretics or elimination therapies, leafy veg¬ 
etables that are penetrating or too hot. Drinking wa¬ 
ter to excess, oversleeping, lack of sleep, eating mud, 
excess yogurt, dry meats, and uncooked foods also 
cause edema. Further causes include over-exertion, 
long distance walking, excessive travel, and eating 
mutually contradictory foods (e.g., fish and milk). 

It may also develop from difficult breathing, cough, 
diarrhea, hemorrhoids, enlarged abdomen, menor¬ 
rhagia, and fever. Other causes include simultaneous 
vomiting and diarrhea resulting from indigestion, 
undigested food remaining in the stomach, vomit¬ 
ing, pregnancy, herpes, and anemia. This can also be 
caused by other diseases improperly tended to, lack 
of exercise, irregular delivery, abortion, or miscar¬ 
riage. 

External causes result only when the superficial 
s ki n layer is afflicted by injury. 

Development: Edema is either organic or traumatic 
and may pervade the body or remain localized. It may 
be hard and wide, raised, or knotted/glandular. 

These conditions will cause Pitta, blood, and Kapha 


to enter the outer channels and obstruct the circula¬ 
tion channels (Vydn Vayu). This causes localized 
swelling in the s ki n and muscles. There are 9 types 
of edema: Vayu, Pitta, Kapha, Vayu/Pitta, Vayu/ 
Kapha, Pitta/Kapha, Tridosha, external (two causes: 
trauma/injury, and poison). 

When the doshas are in the chest, they pro¬ 
duce upper body swelling. When they are found in 
the urinary bladder, the lower body swells; in the 
middle of the body, the middle swells. Doshas found 
throughout the body cause the whole body to swell. 
When it occurs in the throat or palate, edema remains 
localized. 

Premonitory Signs : 

Fevers, burning sensations, dilated veins at the site 
of edema, heaviness. 

Symptoms: 

General: Heaviness, appearing and disappearing (i.e., 
unstable or variable); swelling, rising temperature, 
thinning vessels, hair standing on end, discoloration 
of s ki n on the extremities. 

Vayu: Swelling moves from place to place, is dry 
with rough hair; reddish or black; thin, constricting, 
pulsating, tingling, pricking, puncturing or cutting 
pains, or a lack of sensation. Swelling quickly rises 
and subsides and spreads to other parts. Can subside 
by massage with fatty and hot materials. It will be 
mild at night and severe during the day. May also be 
mildly burning or tingling. There may be numbness. 
When the skin is pressed the swelling disappears, but 
when the finger releases from the skin, the swelling 


fa? l^i 











The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


rises again. 

Pitta : Black, pink, yellow, or reddish white swelling 
with copper-red hair, malodorous, quick swelling, and 
subsiding. First appears in the middle of the body 
with thirst, burning fever, perspiration, sweating, 
thirst, giddiness, toxicity, and dizziness. Persons 
wanting cold things have painful diarrhea. 

Kapha: Itchy swelling, yellowish-white hair and skin, 
hard, cold, oily, smooth, firm, and thick. It is 
associated with excessive sleep, vomiting, and weak 
digestion. Pressing and releasing fingers from the 
swelling leaves an indentation (i.e., the s kin does not 
rise). This is known as “pitting edema.” Edema is 
slow to appear and heal and swells more at night. 
When pricked, it exudes slimy fluid. Other symptoms 
include heavy limbs, localization of the edema. Touch 
and warmth are pleasing to the person. 

Tridosha: Symptoms of all three doshas appear 
simultaneously. 

Trauma: Results from cutting, splitting, hitting, 
banging, being in a cold breeze or sea breeze. It 
spreads from place to place, is hot to touch, blood- 
red color. Other Pitta symptoms pertain. 

Poisons: Causes include bites, claws, contaminated 
things, feces, urine, semen, poisonous trees, wind, 
gas, and smoke. It is soft, moveable, drooping, quickly 
rising, burning, and painful. 

Recently occurring edema without secondary 
complications can be healed. 

Therapies: 

If undigested food toxins (dma) have caused the 
edema, then fasting and laxatives are first suggested. 
When food is taken, it should only be fresh and whole¬ 
some. It is important to avoid dried vegetables, heavy 
and burning foods and drinks, naps, sexual inter¬ 
course, sweets, alcohol, and fried foods. Take cane 
sugar and fresh ginger (equal quantities—totaling 125 
mg.) on the first day. Increase the dose by 125 mg. 
daily for 10 days. Continue to take this amount for 1 
month. When this recipe is digested, take boiled mi lk , 


and when it can be easily digested take vegetable and 
ghee soup. Thick barley (powder) gruel with 
shatdvarl, dmalaki, vidari kand, arjuna, coriander, 
chitrak, and bilwa are fried in ghee (1 part herbs to 2 
parts ghee) and eaten. 

Vdyu: Dashmul, punamava, haritakl, pippall with 
boiled milk . 

External therapies: This includes 2 or 3 drops of 
dashmul and mahanarayan oils ingested and/or 
applied externally to the edema. The oils may also be 
cooked with cardamom, musta, pippall, and coriander. 
They may also be applied as a paste (lepa) and 
massaged into the s kin . Afterwards, a warm bath with 
vdsdk, musta, and sandalwood is useful. 

Burning and pain- dashmul oil and paste. 

Pimples and burning- licorice, musta, sandalwood, 
viclahga, neem, chitrak, triphald, and dashmul as oil 
and paste. 

Vdyu and constipation: Niruha enema and castor oil, 
ghee, and cane sugar - before meals. If circulatory 
blocks, poor digestion, or anorexia exist, fermented 
barley drinks are essential. 

Vdyu/Pitta: Triphald, musta, sandalwood, arjuna, 
licorice, ginger, black pepper, turmeric, guduchl, and 
castor oil. 

Pitta and diarrhea: Drink 1/2 cup yogurt with 1/2 
cup water; mixed with ginger, chitrak, black pepper, 
and pippall with raw honey. 

Pitta external therapies: Sandalwood, guduchl and 
gokshura are made into a paste and applied to the 
body. The same herbs may be cooked with oil and 
used for abhyahga (massage-like). Afterwards, abath 
in warm water with sandalwood and musta is 
recommended. 

Kapha: Triphald, rhubarb, black pepper, pippall, 
ginger, trikatu, punamava, and dashmul are ingested. 
Kapha external therapies: Pippall paste or sand 
massages are useful. Water mixed with ginger may 
be poured on the body (or bathed in). Afterwards, 
one applies sandalwood oil to the body. 

When edema is located in the lower part of the 






















Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 25: Metabolic System 


body, purgation is advised. If the edema is found in 
the upper part of the body, emetics are used. 

Should edema be caused by improper oleation 
therapy, then dry herbs and foods are used to coun¬ 
terbalance this effect. For symptoms of fainting, 
dislilking everything, burning, and thirst, boild mik 
is given. 


Meningitis 

This results from external factors. A meningococ¬ 
cal virus infects the brain and membranous sheath of 
the spinal cord. This disease was not present during 
ancient Vedic times. It is difficult to heal. It is called 
“brain edema” and is caused by Vayu and Kapha. 
All three doshas become deranged. This is a very 
serious condition. 

Therapies: The best herbs include jatamanshl, gotu 
kola, vachd, chitrak, trikatu, small cardamom, pipped!, 
and punarnavd. They are ingested, used as 
aromatherapy, and nasal oils, to evacuate the head 
from the excess doshas. Also useful are shiro dhdrd 
and shiro basti. 


Quinsy or Throat Edema (a Vayu/Kapha dis¬ 
order); may develop into meningitis. 

Therapies: Herbs to heal this condition include 
trikatu, dashmul, jatamanshl, and guggul. 


Palatal abscesses (Talu vidradhi) 

This is an abscess with burning, redness, and oozing 
in the throat. It is caused by all three therapy, then 
dry herbs and foods are used to doshas. 

Therapies: Herbs include sitopaladi, kahehanar 
fainting, disliking everything, burning, and thirst, 
guggul, and also general treatment of Vidradhi is 
boiled milk is given.followed (see Chapter 16 on ab¬ 
scess and sinus). 

Acute superficial glossitis (Upajihvika) 

This condition is located in the back of the tongue 
(Kapha/Vayu), whereas sublingual abscesses or 
adhijivika (caused by Kapha) are found on the bottom 
of the tongue. 

Therapies: Herbs used include trikatu, guggul, 
licorice, kut, and vachd. 


Gingivitis (Puakusha) 

This is caused by excess blood and Pitta. The con¬ 
dition is an inflammation of the gum muscles. 

Therapies: Herbs used include sesame oil, eld (car¬ 
damom), licorice, and cane sugar. 


Dental abscesses (Danta-Vidradhi) 

This is an inflammation in the muscles around the 
teeth. It is caused by excess Kapha and blood in that 
area. 


Tonsillitis (Bidalika) 

When edema occurs in the throat it is called 
bidalika or tonsillitis. The swelling causes redness 
and burning, impairs the breathing, and causes great 
pain. This is a Pitta/Kapha condition. If the swelling 
surrounds the entire neck, it is very serious. 

Therapies: The same therapies as quinsy are used. 
Other herbs include kahehanar, triphald, and trikatu. 


Therapies: Herbs include turmeric, small carda¬ 
mom, chestnuts, kayaphal. The best herb is 
badradanti. 


Goiter (Galaganda) 

This is a single swelling (cyst) in the throat. When 
a chain of swellings around the lower neck (i.e., neck¬ 
lace-shaped) develops it is called cervical adenitis or 















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


gandamala. Both diseases can be healed. However, 
if they are associated with chronic rhinitis (plnasa), 
chest pain (parshva shula), bronchitis, vomiting, and 
fever, then they are incurable. 

Therapies: Herbs include kanchanar, guggul, 
sitopaladi, trikatu, and vacha (calamus). Other 
therapies include emesis and purgation to eliminate 
the doshas from the body; therapeutic smoke 
inhalation, and fasting. If the swelling is in the mouth, 
then the herbs are made into a paste and rubbed onto 
the swelling from inside the mouth. 


Hyperthyroidism 

(Graves’ Disease falls under this category.) 

Symptoms of hyperthyroidism include enlarged 
thyroid, nervousness, hypersensitivity to heat, 
palpitations, fatigue, increased appetite, weightloss, 
tachycardia, insomnia, weakness, diarrhea or frequent 
stools; and difficult breathing. It is caused by all three 
doshas, but mainly Pitta. 

Therapies: Kanchanar guggul is the main herb 
used. Other herbs include triphala and trikatu. 

Endemic Goiter: Symptoms include an enlarged 
thyroid gland with almost no function. It begins subtly. 
Persons can develop dull facial expression, 
hoarseness, slow speech, puffiness, intolerance to 
cold, drooping eyelids, sparse, coarse, and dry hair. 
Other indications are dry, scaly skin, weight gain, poor 
memory, psychosis, constipation, carpal tunnel 
syndrome in wrists and ankles. Further symptoms 
include slow reflexes, menorrhagia, mild anemia, 
difficult breathing, umbilical hernia, slow bone 
growth. 

This is a Vayu disorder, usually found in iodine- 
deficient areas as endemic goiter. It is often found in 
persons living in land-locked, mountain areas, where 
there is no iodine from the sea salt and fish. Iodised 
salt is used as preventive therapy. Hot spices, such as 
trikatu, pippall, and ginger, are useful. 


Hypothyroid 

Herbs include trikatu, shilajit, and iron and min¬ 
eral ashes (abhrak and mukta bhasmas) 

Thyroid Therapies 

For all thyroid conditions: Irish moss (insufficient 
hormones), trikatu, yogaraj guggul (Vayu), kaishore 
guggul (Pitta) or pure guggul (Kapha). Mustard oil 
can be applied externally on the throat. 


Granthi (hard, small, benign tumors) 

These tumors are caused by excesses of any of 
the doshas. If they occur in the muscle tissues, they 
are large swellings. If they occur in the fat (medas), 
they are painless, oily, and movable. If surrounded 
by bleed vessels, they pulsate. 

Therapies: Surgery is recommended. If very 
young or very old persons have large and rough 
tumors in the pelvic area, abdomen throat, or in any 
vital organ, surgery is not advised. Cancer and 
(large) tumors are treated l ik e hard (small) tumors 
(see Chapter 22). 


Alaji 

This is a painful emption that is copper-colored 
and emits a discharge from the mouth. 

Therapies: Include amalakl, shatdvarl, and 
turmeric. 


Edema between the skin and nails 
(without ulceration) 

This form of edema is caused by excess muscle 
tissue (mdmsa) and blood. It is called whitlow or 
charmanak-hantara shotha. 

Therapies: Herbs used include guggul, triphala, 
vidahga, ginger, and black pepper. 











Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 25: Metabolic System 


Cysts in the armpit after fever 

These are painless, difficult to touch and are ex¬ 
pansive (called vidarika). It is caused by vitiated Vayu 
and Kapha. 

Therapies: Include dashmul, guggul, and trikcitu. 

Therapies for Alajl, charmanak-hantara, and 
vidarika suggest blood-letting through surgical mea¬ 
sures. 


swelling, hardness, and ulcers may occur. If not tended 
to, Vayu quickly moves into the joints, bones, and 
marrow, causing sharp pain and curvatures of the 
bones and joints. Eventually, it can make persons lame 
in one or both legs. 

Vayu: Throbbing and pricking pain, dry swelling, 
black or blue color, increasing during Vayu times and 
decreasing at other times. Constriction of arteries and 
tendons in the finger or toe joints can occur along 
with sharp body pain, severe joint pain, aversion to 
cold, stiffness, tremors, and loss of feeling. 


Skin abscesses (reddish pus eruptions -vishpatake) 

These appear all over the body, along with fever Blood: Swelling with great pain, pricking, coppery 
and thirst. This is a Kapha/Pitta derangement. color, tingling sensation, itching, and oozing. It does 

Therapies: Herbs include punarnava, neem, and not subside with either oil y or dr y thin S s such as nuts 
manjishtha. and granola respectively. 


Gout (Vata-shonita or Vata-rakta) 

Causes: Eating foods that cause burning during 
digestion, incompatible foods, excess sleep, not 
sleeping, improper sexual intercourse, trauma, not 
undergoing purificatory therapies, and cold breezes, 
all weaken Vayu and blood. Aggravated Vayu, 
prevented from moving in its normal path, moves in 
the wrong directions owing to the excessed blood. 
Vayu first vitiates the blood, then causes Vayu 
excessed blood diseases. This generally occurs in 
weak-constitution people who do not walk much. It 
first affects legs from prolonged sitting. Eight types 
of gout exist: Vayu, Blood, Pitta, Kapha, Vayu/Pitta, 
Vayu/ Kapha, Pitta/Kapha, and Tridosha. 

Premonitory Signs : Skin is very smooth, hard to the 
touch, discolored, burning, itching, debilitated, loose¬ 
ness of the body, throbbing, pricking, intermittent, 
and splitting joint pain. There is heaviness and loss 
of sensation. Symptoms may subside and reappear 
intermittently. 

Symptoms: Beginning in the feet (sometimes in the 
hands), symptoms slowly and steadily spread 
throughout the body. Gout occurs in the skin and 
muscles, with symptoms of itching, various pains, 
and colors, stretching, severe burning, and heat. Later, 


Pitta : Burning, delusion, perspiration, fainting, 
toxicity, thirst, sensitivity to touch, pain, redness, 
swelling, ulceration, and severe heat. 

Kapha: Inactivity, heaviness, loss of feeling, oily and 
cold skin, mild itching, and pain. 

Dual/Tridosha: Symptoms of the related doshas 
appear simultaneously. 

Healing Outlook: Gout recently caused by one dosha 
can be healed. When caused by two doshas, it is 
containable. Gout caused by tridosha, that is oozing, 
immovable or leading to malignant nodules, cannot 
be healed. 

Avarana Vayu: When Vayu quickly spreads into the 
channels of the blood in the joints of the extremities, 
it cannot function normally. Vayu and blood produce 
different kinds of pain and become life threatening. 

Prana Vayu: Dryness occurs as a result of a lack of 
fat, over-exercise, fasting, eating, trauma, long¬ 
distance walking, forcing the elimination of or 
suppression of natural urges. It causes many diseases 
or symptoms including sensory organ disorders, nasal 
mucus, facial palsy, thirst, cough, and labored 
breathing. 




















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Udana Vayu: Excesses occur by suppressing 
sneezing, belching, vomiting, and not sleeping; 
carrying heavy loads on the head, overindulging in 
emotions (e.g., crying, laughing). This results in 
diseases of the neck and head, including throat 
obstructions, mental disorders, vomiting, loss of taste 
and appetite, nasal mucus, and enlarged neck glands. 
Vydna Vayu: Vydna becomes aggravated from 
excesses of walking, sexual intercourse, worry, or 
exercise. Other Vayu aggravations include improper 
exercise, eating incompatible and dry foods. 
Emotional causes include fear, joy, and sorrow. This 
causes loss of virility, enthusiasm, strength, swelling, 
mental disorders, fever, and paralysis of the entire 
body. Other developments include intermittent pain, 
hair standing on end, loss of sensation, s ki n diseases, 
herpes, and other systemic diseases. 

Samdna Vayu: It becomes excessed by eating 
improper or uncooked foods; foods causing 
indigestion; cold, too much sleep or too little sleep. 
This causes abdominal pains or tumors, duodenal 
diseases, and other intestinal or alimentary tract 
diseases. 

(Air with toxins) causes stupor, inactivity, heavi¬ 
ness, oily body, poor digestion, loss of taste or appe¬ 
tite, lassitude, cold, swelling, and a desire for pun¬ 
gent, dry foods. 

Apdna Vayu: This is vitiated by eating dry, heavy 
foods, suppressing or forcing the elimination of urges, 
excess travel, sitting, and walking. This causes 
diseases of the colon, urinary or semen disorders, 
hemorrhoids, rectal prolapse. 


yawning, wanting to wrap the body with clothes, pain 
(relieved by massage). 

Reproductive (Shukra) Obstructions: Semen is 
ejaculated with great force or not at all, or it may not 
result in fertility. 

Food Obstructions: Abdominal pain shortly after 
eating that disappears after digestion. 

Urine Obstructions: Non-elimination with urinary 
bladder distention. 

Feces Obstructions: Constipation causes sharp colon 
and rectum pains. Ingested oil or ghee is quickly 
digested causing gas and dry feces. 

All Seven Tissue Obstructions: When Vayu is 
obstructed by all the tissues, there is pain in the pelvis, 
groin, and back. Vayu moving in the wrong direction, 
causes poor health and severe heart pain. 

Pitta Obstructing Prana Vayu: Occurs during 
digestion and causes dizziness, fainting, vomiting, 
burning, thirst, pain, diarrhea, momentary blindness, 
burning in the alimentary tract from pungent, hot, 
sour, and salty foods, and a desire for cold things. 
Pitta Obstructing Udana Vayu: Internal burning, loss 
of strength. 

Pitta Obstructing Vyana Vayu: Burning everywhere, 
exhaustion, hindered movement with fatigue and pain. 
Pitta Obstructing Samdna Vayu: This causes profuse 
perspiration, restlessness, thirst, burning. Pitta 
Obstructing Vydna Vayu: Yellowish feces and urine, 
excess menstmal bleeding or heat discomfort from 
increased temperature in the female and male genitalia 
and the rectum. 


Tissues (Dhdtus) Obstructing Vayu: 

Blood (Rakta) Obstructions: Symptoms include 
burning, severe s ki n and muscle pain, red swelling, 
and s ki n patches. 

Muscle (Mdmsa> Obstructions: Hard swellings, 
oozing, hair standing on end, feeling as though ants 
are crawling on the body. 

Fat(Medas) Obstructions: Soft, oily, moveable body 
swellings. Healing is difficult. 

Bone (Asthi) Obstructions: The body is over-heated, 
severe pricking pain, weakness. It is relieved by 
massage. 

Marrow/Nerves (Maiid): The body parts bend, excess 


Kapha Obstructing Vayu: Debility, stupor, loss of 
appetite and taste, vomiting, expectoration of mucus 
or saliva, excess sneezing and belching, labored 
breathing, heaviness, cold, pain. It can be comforted 
by pungent, hot, sour, and salty things; fasting, 
exercise, dry or hot foods. 

Kapha Obstructing Udana Vayu: Heaviness, loss of 
taste or appetite, difficulty speaking, weakness, and 
a pallid complexion can develop. 




























Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 25: Metabolic System 


Kapha Obstructing Vyana Vayu: Sharp throat, joint 
and bone pain, heaviness, impaired walking. 

K apha Obstructing Saniana Vayu: Physical coldness, 
lack of sweating, poor digestion. 

Kapha Obstructing Apdna Vayu: Kapha in the urine 
and feces. 

The five Vayus become mutually obstructed or in 
various combinations. 

Prana Obstructing Udana: Labored breathing, 
mucus, sharp head pain, heart pain, dry mouth. 
Prana Obstructing Udana: Loss of complexion, 
enthusiasm, and strength. 

The imbalances of prana, Vayu, Pitta, and Kapha 
may occur alone or together, creating an almost 
infinite number of diseases. Therefore, one needs to 
note: 

1) onset of the symptoms, 

2) location of symptoms, and 

3) increases or decreases of bodily functions to 
determine causality. 

Prana Vayu is the main source of life, although 
Udana Vayu is the main source of strength. When 
one of these symptoms is not clearly detectable or 
has lasted for over a year, they are difficult to heal. 
Therapies should begin as soon as possible to avoid 
secondary complications, such as abscesses, enlarged 
spleen, heart disease, abdominal tumors, or poor 
digestion. 

Therapies: 

General: Blood-letting is useful for burning, piercing 
pain and redness, numbness, itching, prickly 
sensation. If the disorder moves around, it is 
eliminated by venesection or scarifying. Vayu doshas 
should not undergo blood-letting. 

First, persons take oil (internally and externally), 
and a rough or mild purgative. Enemas are used 
frequently as well. Sprinkling, pastes, abhyahga 
(massage-like), poultice, and Pitta-reducing foods are 
advised. 

Vayu: Sesame oil, abhyahga, mi lk enemas with ghee, 
warm poultices, Vayu-reducing lifestyle and foods, 
ghee, shatavari, bala, kapikachhu, sugar cane, 
punamava, guduchl, dashmul, and boiled milk are 


used. Purgatives include triphala and castor oil. 
Gokshura and pippall are also useful. (Deep-seated 
diseases with affected blood are treated as Vayu 
excesses.) 

Vayu With Pain: Boiled milk with dashmul or 
sprinkling warm ghee removes pain. Pastes made of 
green lentils, rice, boiled milk, ghee, and sesame oil 
are applied to the body. Alternatively, sesame and 
mustard are applied as a poultice. 

Convulsion. Stiffness, Pain: Sprinkled with ghee or 
grape juice and cane sugar. 

Pitta and Blood: Purgatives, ghee, boiled milk, 
sprinkling, enema; cooling herbs— amalakl, guduchl, 
gokshura, shatavari, pittapapra. Pitta-reducing foods 
and lifestyle are recommended. Purgatives include 
triphala and castor oil. 

Burning: Sandalwood and floral essential oils mixed 
in water and sponged on body parts; wearing a 
moonstone, pearl, red coral, or a sandalwood 
necklace. 

Burning and Pain: Barley flour and licorice or mi lk 
and ghee. 

Burning With Redness and Pain: blood-letting, 
followed by an application of paste of durba, aloe 
vera gel, and mahjishtha. 

Bleeding or Pus: Incision, cleansed then healed with 
the above Pitta/Blood measures. 

Kapha: Mild emesis, mild external oil application, 
sprinkling, and warm pastes, Kapha-reducing diet and 
habits. Herbs for all these therapies include guggul, 
shilajit, pippall, gokshura, guduchl, ginger, triphala, 
calamus, cardamom, musta, chitrak, vidahga, vasak, 
with ghee and boiled mi lk . 

Tridosha: Triphala, guduchl, pippall, shilajit, 
gokshura, and punamava. 

Kaishore guggul is the best for all types of gout. It 
helps to purify the blood of cholesterol and uric acid. 


Thirst (Trishna) 

Causes: There are 6 causes of thirst: Vayu, Pitta, 
Kapha, Tridosha, a type resulting from loss of plasma, 























The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


and those resulting from other diseases, such as TB, 
diabetes, fevers, and wasting. Thirst may develop 
from dryness at the root of the tongue, throat, palate, 
channels supplying water, or the pancreas. 

Symptoms: General experiences include dry mouth, 
unquenchable thirst, aversion to food, weak voice, 
rough throat, lips and tongue, swollen tongue, 
exhaustion, nonsensical conversation, mental 
wandering, emaciation, debility, deafness, delusion, 
giddiness, or heart disease. 

Vayu: Emaciation, helplessness, pain in temples, 
dizziness, loss of smell, bad taste in the mouth, teary 
eyes, insomnia, physical weakness, thirst that is 
increased when drinking cold water. 

Pitta : Fainting, bitter taste in the mouth, reddish 
eyes, constant dryness in the mouth, burning 
sensation, hot fumes. 

Kapha: As aggravated Kapha overflows and 
obstructs Vayu in the channels providing water, 
Kapha dries up. This results in a thorny feeling in the 
throat, oversleeping, sweet taste in the mouth, gas, 
dull headache, lethargy, vomiting, loss of taste and 
appetite, lassitude, and indigestion. 

Tridosha: Symptoms of all three doshas occur. 

Toxins (dnia): Caused by Vayu/Pitta. Results from 
fasting or starvation. 

Heat Exhaustion/Cold: Thirst occurs when one 
contracts heat exhaustion from fire or sun, then 
suddenly plunges into cold water. This prevents heat 
from leaving the body—forcing it into the abdomen— 
causing Pitta thirst problems. 

Foocl/Drink: Excess alcohol or wine or eating too 
much fatty foods by persons with very strong digestive 
fires, produces Pitta-thirst problems. Excess oily, 
indigestible, sour, or salty foods causes Kapha thirst. 

Plasma: When plasma is reduced, one experiences 
dryness, fatigue, emaciation, exhaustion without 
exertion, and a distaste for noise. 

Therapies: All types of thirst relate to the 
predominance of Vayu and Pitta and plasma loss 
(dehydration). 


Plasma Loss: Cool honey water relieves thirst as 
does boiled water with rock candy, barley flour, cane 
sugar, and honey. Soothing foods include barley 
sweets with honey and cane sugar, basmati rice; for 
all foods, add honey and cane sugar, boiled milk , ghee, 
avoid sour and salty foods and liquids; green lentils, 
and other types of lentils. 

Ghee is massaged on the body. Short baths in cold 
water are taken, followed by drinking boiled milk 
with bitter herbs (e.g., chitrak, katukd, neem, aloe 
vera) honey, and cane sugar. This milk concoction 
may also be sprinkled over the body. Ghee may also 
be used as nasya (nasal massage). Paste made with 
dmalaki ginger, sandalwood, licorice and ghee may 
be applied to the heart, face, and head to alleviate 
thirst, fainting, and giddiness. Pastes of these herbs 
can also be applied to the head. 

One may also gargle with milk, sugar cane, honey, 
and water to heal a dry palate. Drinking yogurt/water, 
barley with cimalaki is recommended. External thirst- 
relieving therapies include wet cloth wraps, gentle 
massage, cool baths, and wearing wet clothes. 
Wearing moonstones or pearls, visiting or visualizing 
beautiful, cool oceans, rivers or streams, imagining 
cool breezes, and moon bathing may also relieve 
thirst.. 

Vayu: Soft, light cold, Vayu-reducing herbs (e.g., 
shatdvari, ashwagandha, and dmalaki), foods and 
drinks, with ghee. 

Vayu/Pitta: Soft, light, cold, Vayu- and Pitta- 
reducing herbs, foods, and drinks, with ghee, and 
rejuvenatives (e.g., shatdvari). 

Pitta : Water with sandalwood, guduchi, cane sugar 
and honey, basmati rice. 

Kapha: Trikatu, calamus, bitters, such as chitrak, 
katukd, neem and aloe vera, astringents, such as 
raspberry, and dmalaki (sours) are ingested. If thirst 
is related to stiffness, anorexia, indigestion, lassitude, 
or vomiting, emesis with yogurt, honey, salt, and hot 
water are used. 

Triphald: Boiled in water and allowed to cool be¬ 
fore drinking. 

Astringents, such as red raspberry, turmeric, 



















Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 25: Metabolic System 


amalakl, shatavari, ashwaganclha, brahmi, vdsak, 
ashoka, with ghee, cane sugar, honey in boiled milk, 
or barley may be taken. 

Alcoholism Hurst: Cold baths, then alcohol with 
1/2 water, amalakl, rock salt, aromatics, wine with 1/ 
2 water, cane sugar and water with gotu kola. 

Anorexia Thirst: Thin gruel, ghee, boiled mi lk . 

Excess Intake of Fat: Thin gruel, guggul, ghee, 


boiled milk, cane sugar. 

Thirst resulting from eating heavy foods: Emesis, 
ghee, mi lk 

Fainting complications: Mahjishtha, gotu kola, 
chitrak, katuka. 

Thirst after severe disease: Plain water is dan¬ 
gerous. Coriander water with cane sugar and raw 
honey is useful. 


Although improper use of foods can lead to disease or even death, 
drinking alcohol additionally leads to loss of self-worth, life path, 
wealth, true pleasure, intelligence, and courage. 

Ashtanga Hridayam; 
Nidanasthana Ch. 6; ver. 11 
















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 




cLcrLcru-L€?-CM-L ?Ffw±J±A. 













Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 26: Miscellaneous 


Education is not a matter of always seeing new things; 
education means seeing the same things in a new light. 

Unknown 

Chapter 26 
Miscellaneous 

3 Vital Organs, Dangerous Spiritual Practices, Herbs for Tissues 
and Organs, Definitions of Glands, Organs and Doshas, 
When to Take Herbs, Herbal Recipes, Acupuncture 


3 Vital Organs (Maha Marmas) 

dilution: There are 107 vital body 
I?vl P arts - Of these, three organs are paramount: 

the urinary bladder, heart, and head. They 
are considered the main sites because they are the 
seats of the vital breath (prana) and Vayu that can 
cause immediate death if wounded. 

Cause & Development: Downward moving air 
(Apdna Vayu) in the colon becomes excessed from 
eating and drinking pungent, bitter, astringent, and 
rough foods, suppressing natural urges, fasting, and 
sexual intercourse. These actions bring about obstruc¬ 
tions and retention of stool, gas, and urine, and ulti¬ 
mately cause air to move in the reverse direction. 

This results in frequent and intense pain in the pel¬ 
vic and heart area, abdomen, ribs, and back. Obstruc¬ 
tions cause abdominal distention, nausea, cutting and 
piercing pain, indigestion, cystitis, stool retention, 
enlarged organ membranes, and upward-moving 
Vayu (Udana Vayu). The stool is dry and difficult to 
pass. The body is rough, coarse, and cold with fever, 
difficult urination, dysentery, heart, and digestive dis¬ 
orders. Persons may experience vomiting, blindness, 
deafness, headache, mental disorders, thirst, internal 
bleeding, anorexia, and tumors. Other experiences 
include cough, labored breathing, facial paralysis, 
chest pain, cold, Vayu mental disorders, vcita shthlld 
(prostate disorders), and many other serious disor¬ 
ders. 

Therapies: Oil abhyahga (massage-like) with sesame, 
mahdndrayan and pahchaguna oils. Fomentation 
(moist heat) should be applied to the troubled area. 
Once the illness is balanced, oil and dry enemas, sup¬ 


positories, purgatives, carminatives, and other Vayu- 
reducing herbs arc used. Suppositories are made with 
oil, trikatu, viclahga, pippall, and cane sugar. Foods 
include barley, Vayu-reducing (steamed) vegetables, 
fresh ginger, sesame oil, and ghee. Should the condi¬ 
tion resolve, but gas and stool retention continue to 
exist, an oil enema is used. For hard bowels, colic, 
heart disease, tumor, indigestion, weak spleen, and 
upward-moving air; vachd, hantakl, pippall, chitrak, 
and viclahga are used. 

Hard bowels are caused by dma, arising from 
stiffness, heaviness in the head and abdomen, 
retaining belches, and mucus. It is healed through 
emesis, reduction therapies, and digestive herbs. 

Vital organ diseases include dysuria, diseases of 
the heart and head (including mouth, hair, eyes, ears, 
nose, and throat), and anorexia. These are discussed 
in detail in their respective chapters. 







































The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Organ 

Governs 

Heart 

prana, apdna, mind, intellect, 

consciousness, mahdbhutas 

Head 

senses 


scrotum, raphe, vas deferens, 

Bladder 

middle of the rectum, and 

(Basti) 

uterus: governs urine, and is the 


stabilizer of all fluid channels. 


When each of these three sites is afflicted, various 
diseases occur. 


Organ Diseases 

Heart 

cough, labored breathing, debility, 
dry mouth and throat; contraction 
of the stomach, protracted tongue, 
epilepsy, insanity, delirium, 
vacant-mindedness 

Head 

stiff neck, facial paralysis, rolling 
eyeballs, confusion, cramps, loss 
of coordination and movement; 
labored breathing, lockjaw, loss of 
voice, muteness, stuttering, ptosis, 
quivering cheeks, yawning, 
salivation, crooked face 

Basti 

retention of gas, urine and stool; 
pain in groin, penis, and urinary 
bladder; stiffness, spasm in the 
navel, lower abdomen, anus, hip; 
udvarta, phantom tumors. These 
three vital spots are to be 
especially protected from Vayu 
disorders as Vayu is the cause of 
the other doshas, and the root 
cause of the vital breath. The best 
therapy for this is basti. 


No other therapy equals (unctuous) enema 
for protecting the vital parts 

Charak; Si., Ch 9 v7 


Vayu-Reducing Therapies 


Organ 

Therapeutics 

Heart 

asafoetida, rock salt, sour liquid, 
sugar 

Head 

abhyahga, sweating, poultices, 
ingesting unctuous items, snuff, 
juice pressing (in nostrils), smoke 
(dhuma) 

Basti 

moist heat, suppositories, 
nonunctuous enema, urethra 
douche, bilwa, durbci, gokshura, 
barley, turmeric, ghee, shatdvarl, 
guduchl, lodhra, bald, vdsaka, 
vachd, pdshana bheda 


Heart Disorder (Hridaya) 

Therapies: Arjuna, ginger, pomegranate, rhubarb, 
harltakl, asafoetida, black salt, barley, Vayu- and 
Kapha-reducing foods and life-styles. 

Urinary Bladder (Basti) 

Vayu: Becomes excessed from suppressing urine. 
This causes retention, distress, and itching. This is 
called vdtabasti. Retention results in excess Udana 
Vayu in the urethra. A feeling of pierced, tom, and 
stiffening of the urethra occurs during urination. Other 
symptoms include breaking pain, heaviness, cramps, 
extreme pain, and retention of urine and feces. 

In persons who are debilitated and have roughness, 
Vayu may cause the stool to be reversed in its pas¬ 
sage and enter the urinary canal. Thus, urine is passed 
with feces accompanied with malodor and straining. 
This is called vidvighata. 

Vayu with Pitta: Drying up the urine causes the pass¬ 
ing of red or yellow urine, with difficulty, and burn¬ 
ing in the pelvis and perineum. 

Vayu with Kapha: This affects the blood and pro¬ 
duces a hard nodular mass in the opening of the uri¬ 
nary bladder, resulting in difficult urination. This con¬ 
dition is called mutragranthi. 

Pitta : When Pitta afflicts the bladder, symptoms in¬ 
clude burning sensation, pain, and abnormal color. 




































Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 26: Miscellaneous 


Kapha: When Kapha afflicts the bladder, symptoms 
include heaviness, swelling, unctuous, and white and 
rushing urine. 

Pitta and Kapha: When both these doshas obstmct 
the urethra, the condition cannot be healed. 

External: Fast traveling, jumping, exertion, injury, and 
pressure may cause the bladder to bulge and remain 
extended, making one look pregnant. The bladder is 
painful, quivering, and bums. Urine passes in drops; 
however, if the bladder is pressed, urine passes in a 
stream. The bladder feels stiff with cramping. This 
severe condition is called bastikundala. 

Depending on the dosha causing these disorders, 
diuretics, enemas, and urethral douches (see Chapter 
7 on pahcha karma/basti section) can be used. 


Head Disorders (Shiro-roga-Vijnaniya) 

There are 11 head diseases: Vayu, Pitta, Kapha, 
Tridosha, blood, wastes, parasites, suryavarta, anan- 
tavdta, ardhavabhedaka, shamkhaka. 

Symptoms: 

Vdyu: Violent headaches occur without cause. 
Symptoms worsen at night and are relieved by 
pressure or head fomentation (moist heat). Pitta: 
Violent burning and aching head pain; a feeling of 
hot coals on the scalp; burning vapor from nostrils 
(diminishes at night or when applying cold packs to 
the head). 

Kapha: Headaches; a sticky mucus-coated palate and 
throat that feel cold and heavy; swollen face and eyes. 
Tridosha: Symptoms of all three doshas. 

Blood: The same symptoms as Pitta; and head pain 
is unbearable even when touched lightly. 

Wastes (Kshayaia >: Waste in the fatty substances in 
the body tissues (e.g., mdmsa, medas, majja), brain 
areas, and semen causes unbearable head pain. This 
condition is aggravated by fomentation, fumigation, 
nasal therapies, emetics, and blood-letting. 

Parasites (Krimiia >: Pricking, tingling head pain; with 
liquid secretions mixed with blood and pus from the 
nose occur from parasites in the nose. 

Suryavarta: Tridoshic excesses, suppression of urine 
with indigestion, vitiation of blood, and brain 


involvement from Vayu can cause severe eye and 
eyebrow pain at sunrise. This condition worsens as 
the day progresses, and subsides in the evening. It 
may be reduced from cold things (and sometimes 
warm things). The morning sun liquefies the excesses 
in the brain causing headache. Resolidification occurs 
after sunset. 

Ananta-Vdyu (trigeminal neuralgia): Severe pain in 
the two nerves at the back of the neck and in the 
carotid arteries. This then spreads to the eyes, 
eyebrows, and temples, causing throbbing in the 
cheeks, and paralysis of the jaw bone and eye. It is 
associated with excesses of all three doshas. This 
condition develops from excess fasting (or insufficient 
food), grief, or cold. All three doshas become 
excessed. Symptoms also include twitching near the 
cheeks, lockjaw, and eye disorders. 
Ardhavabhedaka: Excruciating piercing, or aching 
pain in one half of the skull; causing giddiness when 
Vayu becomes excessed from ingesting rough food, 
overeating, eating with indigestion, or from exposure 
to easterly winds and dew. Excessive coitus, 
suppressing natural urges, overexertion and exercise, 
or Kapha excesses also upset half of the head. It may 
recur at intervals of 10 to 14 days or at random. Some 
authorities say it is caused by all three doshas. 
Symptoms include severe, cutting, head pain; 
churning in one carotid artery, eyebrow, temple, ear, 
eye, and forehead; trembling. Severe cases may result 
in loss of sight and hearing. 

Shankaka: Severe head and temple pain due to local 
Vayu combined with Pitta, Kapha, and blood. Pain 
may spread to the temples, causing severe swelling, 
great pain, burning, and redness. This can be fatal. 
Healing it is difficult. After three days, therapies may 
be given, including head evacuation, sprinkling, and 
other anti-erysipelas therapies. 
























The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Apatantraka: Udana Vayu, moving upwards in 
excess, reaches the heart, head, and temples. This 
causes convulsions and confusion, labored breathing, 
stiff/closed eyes, unconsciousness, and groaning. 

Therapies: 

Vayu: Head diseases caused only by Vayu dosha are 
relieved by the same measures for the nervous system 
(Vayu-Vycidhi —Chapter 20). Sesame oil, ghee, boiled 
mi lk (taken tepid), and pungent and hot herbs are 
taken before bed. Milk cooked with shatavarl, 
ashwagandha, and hold is used to wash the diseased 
area. A lukewarm plaster of the same is applied to 
the scalp. Afterwards, oil, ghee, and Vayu-reducing 
herbs are cooked together and used as a nasal oil. 

Vayu-reducing foods and lifestyle, aromatherapy 
(sandalwood oil on the forehead), hot-oil head 
abhyahgas (shiro dhard/shiro basti), and gotu kola 
oil (3 drops in the nose followed by gentle massage) 
are useful therapies. Poultices made from the herbs 
and foods listed below may be wrapped around the 
head. 

Herbs: Vamsha lochana, guggul, hantakl, gotu 
kola, gokshura, ashwagandhci, bibhltakl, bhrihgardj, 
bald, dashmul, trikatu, brdhmi ghee. 

Foods: Almonds (soaked and peeled), sesame 
tahini, ghee, sesame oil, boiled milk, basmati rice, 
whole wheat, barley. Yogurt/water ( lassi) is also useful 
for soothing nerves. If excess impurities develop, and 
the disorder is not healed from the preceding 
therapies, one takes mild oil purgatives (e.g., castor 
oil) to help the evacuation process. Warm carminative 
herbs such as cardamom, ginger, cinnamon, cloves, 
and turmeric help dispel gas, improve digestion, and 
assist absorption of undigested foods that cause 
impurities. Weak persons should use non-oil enemas 
and digestive herbs and foods instead of purgatives. 

Pitta and Blood: Plasters of cool herbs (vetasa, 
sandalwood, licorice, musta) and ghee are pasted on 
the scalp and used as cooling head washes. Pitta and 
blood visaipa (erysipelas) therapies are also used: 
chirdyatd, katukd, neem, aloe vera, gentian, 
mahjishthd, barberry; first purgation then blood¬ 
letting is used. 

Ashwaganclhd, vicldri kand, shatdvan, licorice, and 


mashparni are used. Oil or ghee is used as nasal 
therapy nasya. Dry and oily enemas (basti) are also 
employed. Basti herbs include madanphal, priyahgu, 
licorice, bilwa, and eland (baliospermum a.) root. 

Kapha: Emetics, head purgatives, inhaling aromas, 
and gargles are useful. The clear upper part of ghee 
is ingested and frequently used as fomentation to the 
head. Herbs include frankincense, myrrh, cedar, 
calamus, and kushthd. Meals include barley or 
basmati rice taken with hot spices like trikatu 
(mixture). 

Triclosha: Therapies related to the imbalances of the 
three doshas are used. 

Wastes (Kshayaia): Brimhana enema (nourishing— 
honey, sesame oil, dry ginger, rock salt in hot water). 
Ghee is mixed with shatdvan, ashwaganclhd, and 
licorice. Vayu-reducing herbs are used as nasal 
therapy and as drinks (brdhmi ghee). 

Parasites (Krimiia): Inhaling powder and smoke of 
vidahga and musta. 

Surydvarta: Nasal oils, plaster, gargles, eating boiled 
rice, drinking milk with ghee, vamsha lochana, vachd, 
licorice, sandalwood, honey; ingesting ghee after 
meals. Then, snuffs of ghee and shatavarl, 
ashwagandha, and licorice are used. 

Other therapies include plasters of licorice, 
kushthd, sarsaparilla, ghee, and sesame oil; purgation, 
milk, and sprinkling with ghee. 

Ananta-vdyu: The same therapies as surydvarta are 
used. Blood-letting, Vayu- and Pitta-reducing foods; 
and sweets made with wheat, cane sugar, milk, and 
ghee are also suggested. Other therapies include 
ingesting ghee after meals, head evacuation, 
purgation, milk and ghee sprinkling, ingesting 
vitalizing herbs mixed with 8 times as much milk as 
snuff. 

Samkhaka: Ghee taken internally and as a snuff. 
Boiled rice with ghee is recommended. Plasters may 
be made of shatdvan, black sesame seeds, 


















Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 26: Miscellaneous 


licorice, durva, punamava. Cooling washes and herb 
powder nasal therapies are also soothing. 

Apatantraka (a form of epilepsy): Cleanse channels 
obstructed by Vayu and Kapha by blowing irritating 
powders such as black powder, vidahga, haritaki, 
asafoetida, black salt, and barley powder into the nasal 
passages. Brahmi has been found to control epilepsy. 

Note: Heart, bladder, and head disorders deal with 
physiological diseases. Malta manna is important for 
surgery and for wartime injuries. The surgeon must 
be aware of the malm marmas when surgery is 
conducted on the head. Knowledge of maha manna 
is contained within the martial arts. Soldiers are 
trained to aim at these three vital points (heart, bladder, 
head) to kill an enemy. 

Headache/Migraine 

Causes: Many situations can cause headaches: 
indigestion, constipation, colds, flus, poor posture, 
suppression of urges to urinate or pass stool, muscle 
tension, mental conditions such as nervousness, 
worry, anxiety, anger, and high blood pressure. 
Migraines can be caused by heartburn, congenital 
factors and other conditions. The c li mate can further 
aggravate migraines. 

Symptoms: 

Vayu: Anxiety, depression, dry skin, constipation, 
and extreme pain. 

Pitta: Red complexion and eyes, light sensitivity, 
burning sensation, anger, irritability, and nose bleeds. 
Liver and blood toxicity are often associated with 
these symptoms. 

Kapha: Dull headache, heaviness, fatigue, nausea, 
white or clear phlegm, vomiting, and excess 
salivation. Respiratory disorders are often associated 
with these symptoms. 

Therapies: 

Vayu: Triphald as a purgative, jatdmdnshl, 
brahmi, and rest. Shiro dhara (hot oil head massage) 


is very beneficial. 

Pitta: Purgatives (e.g., aloe vera gel, rhubarb, and 
fennel), fiver cleansers (e.g., bhudmalaki and brahmi), 
sandalwood oil on the third eye, temples, heart, and 
under the nose, walks in the full moon and by water; 
and flower gardening reduce Pitta causes of 
migraines. Overexertion, heat and sun should be 
avoided. Shiro dhara (hot oil head massage) is also 
highly beneficial. 

Kapha: Trikatu, brahmi, tulsl tea, inhaling 
eucalyptus oil, vomiting, exercise, nasal snuff of 
ginger or pepper. Shiro dhara (hot oil head massage) 
is also very helpful. 

Cough. Cold. Flu. Allergy-Caused: Decongestant/ 
expectorant herbs—Vayu and Kapha excesses 
(ginger, black pepper, licorice, vidahga, etc.) are 
ingested or used as nasal snuff. Tulsl tea and inhaling 
eucalyptus oil are also very helpful. Ginger paste can 
be applied under the nose, and on the temples and 
forehead. Vomiting (if the person is strong) will help 
rid the head of congestion and pain arising from it. 

Migraines (Ardhavabhedaka): The same therapies as 
surydvarta (above). Medicated oils or ghee, using 
guduchl, bald, and ashwagandha; fomentation, and 
saturating snuff are also advised. Long-term healing 
includes chyavan prdsh, brahmi, and ashwagandha. 
Shiro dhara (hot oil head massage) is also beneficial. 
This is usually a Vayu and Pitta excess, caused by 
lack of sleep, overwork, stress, worry, poor digestion, 
muscular tension, heartburn, or high blood pressure. 


Arthritis/Rheumatism (Amavata) 

Modem medicine recognizes more than 100 types 
of rheumatic diseases. Causes are attributed to injury, 
infection, metabolic conditions, or tumors. In many 
cases the causes remain unknown to western 
medicine. Some disorders a related to age, gender, 
and climactic conditions (i.e., cold or dampness). 
Ayurveda also cites causes related to digestive 










The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


disorders. See Chapter 15. 

Causes and Development: 

Eating incompatible food combinations and 
following incompatible life-styles, lack of exercise 
or exercising after eating fatty foods—or with poor 
digestion, produces ama (undigested food toxins). 
Ama associated with Vayu quickly moves to different 
seats of Kapha in the body, filling them (and blood 
vessels) with waxy material. Thus, ama associated 
with all three doshas blocks tissue pores and passages. 
This causes weakness and heaviness in the heart, 
which becomes the seat of the disease. Joints are 
simultaneously affected, causing stiffness and many 
other disorders. It can also be considered an 
autoimmune disorder. 

Symptoms: 

Joint pain, loss of taste, thirst, lack of enthusiasm, 
heaviness, fever, indigestion, swelling 
(inflammation). 

Vayu: Severe, throbbing, cutting pain that is 
variable and migrating in nature; becomes worse in 
cold weather or when cold water comes in contact 
with the affected joint(s). Other symptoms include 
dry or scaly skin, stiff or cracking joints, bone 
deformities, constipation, gas, abdominal distention, 
low back pain, nervousness, fear, and insomnia. 

Pitta: Burning sensation, redness, swelling, 
inflammation; becomes worse in hot weather or when 
hot water comes in contact with the affected joints. 
Other symptoms include diarrhea, anger, irritability, 
and sweating. 

Kapha: Loss of movement, itching, joint swelling, 
and edema (without inflammation); becomes worse 
in cold and damp or humid weather. Other symptoms 
include dullness, heaviness, aches, oily skin, 
congestion, or mucus in the stool. 

Therapies: 

General: If only one dosha is involved, the con¬ 
dition is easy to heal. When two doshas are impli¬ 
cated, it becomes difficult to heal. When all three 
doshas are involved, and if swelling involves every 
joint in the body, healed will not be possible. 

First toxins should be digested by balancing the 
digestive fire. Eating animal products will aggravate 


the condition, especially pork, red meat, and dark 
poultry. Heavy, mna-increasing foods will also 
increase arthritic symptoms. Many people report 
improvements by following these dietary suggestions. 

Mahandrayan oil improves flexibility, stiffness, 
muscle fatigue, and removes pain. It is mixed with 
sesame oil (1:1) and applied to the painful areas. This 
oil also breaks up blockages and begins to heal locally. 
After oil application, warm heat, yoga, bath, or mild 
exercise further improves this situation. Nadi sweda 
(local steam application; see Chapter 4) with dashmul 
can be applied locally. 

Ndrdyan oil is good for muscle and joint pain, lower 
body circulation, and reversing imbalances caused 
by aging. Brdhmi and sandalwood oils (mixed 
together) are very beneficial for Pitta types of arthritis. 
Avipattikar churna is good to ingest for rheumatism. 

Vayu: Hot spices like cinnamon and fresh ginger. 
Yogaraj guggul is the best herb for this condition; it 
cleanses bone tissue, strengthens bones, and improves 
flexibility. Castor oil or triphald help keep the colon 
cleansed. 

Pitta: Kaishore guggul, sandalwood, guduchi, aloe, 
turmeric, saffron. Musta and nirgundi relieve pain. 

Kapha: Pure guggul is best for this condition. Hot 
herbs are also helpful, such as cinnamon, dry ginger, 
turmeric, trikatu. Musta and nirgundi relieve pain. 









Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 26: Miscellaneous 


Dangerous Spiritual Practices 

Channeling, especially forVayu persons (orVayu- 
minded persons), may render them too ungrounded. 
Allowing another entity to enter your being can be 
very dangerous. 

Kunclalini (spiritual energy)— yoga and other tech¬ 
niques artificially open chakras (spiritual energy cen¬ 
ters) before a person may be prepared. This can lead 
to numerous and serious physical and mental disor¬ 
ders. [This does not apply to persons naturally rais¬ 
ing their kunclalini through meditation and yoga, but 
to those who target specific chakras for their manual 
opening.] Practicing a natural form of meditation that 
allows for the gradual and holistic opening balances 
the entire person. 

Hypnosis is a psychically induced state in which 
a subject responds to suggestions from the hypnotist 
(within certain limitations). If the subject is not natu¬ 
rally ready to respond, even though they may want 
to, hypnosis may cause subtle anxiety and weaken¬ 
ing of the mind-body coordination. Some modem 
hypnotherapists however, utili z e a method whereby 
the client is in complete control of their choices. This 
may be a more natural approach to this practice. 

Prdndydma (breathing practices) can also be harm¬ 
ful if done with force, breath retention, or in excess 
without a proper teacher for guidance. 


Tissue (Dhatu) Building Herbs 

Plasma (rasa): Shildjit, punamavd, vicldrikancl, kshlr 
kakoll 

Blood (rakta): Green leafy vegetables, radish, 
punamavd 

Muscle (mdmsa): Ashwaganclhd, shatdvan, mahdi 
medha, ghee. 

Fat (medas): The same 
Marrow (niaiid): The same 

Bone (asthi): Pravdl pishti, vainsha lochana, 
shatdvan, sesame, black dal, mi lk . 

Semen (shukra): Shatdvan, ashwaganclhd. 


Organs and Herbs 

Kidney problems: Pitta/(Vayu secondary). Best 
herb— shildjit. 

Pancreas: Kapha/Pitta: Glyceric acid (Pitta), insulin 
(sweet/Kapha). Best herb— gurmar. 

Ojas: This means life sap, metabolism, and will 
power. It is not actually something that is found in 
the body. Shatdvan, ashwaganclhd, gucluchl, sa ff ron. 
Brain: Vayu/Kapha secretions, cerebral spinal fluid. 
Brdhml, jatdmdnshl, ashwaganclhd, shafikh pushpl, 
tulsi, bhrihgardj. Nerves: Vayu/Pitta- prdnavaha, 
raktavaha and niajjd srotas. Reduce Pitta to purify 
the nerves. Reduce Vayu to tone the nerves. Brdhml, 
jatdmdnshl, ashwaganclhd, shatikh pushpl, tulsi, 
bhrihgardj. 

Gall Bladder: Pashana bedha, dandelion 

Liver: Punamavd, bhudmalakl 

Blood purification: Mahjishthd 

Lymph: Kaishore guggul, yellow dock, jasmine for 

Pitta and Kapha; bayberry forVayu. 

Adrenals: Kapha/Pitta— brdhml. Secretes adrenaline. 
Develops the mind and affects spiritual development. 
Spleen: Pitta— Punamavd, katukd 
Tendons, ligaments: Kapha—turmeric 
Veins: Pitta - mahjishthd (cleanse/circulate) 
Marrow: Fluid—Kapha; Vayu—space and pushing 
effect; color—Pitta (due to gall bladder). Herbs 
according to dosha. Ashwagandha, bald, bhrihgardj, 
gokshura, musta, pippall, vainsha lochana 
Lungs: Vayu brings Pitta (from peritoneum secre¬ 
tion of the heart) [carbonic acid] to the respiratory 
system, hemoglobin, red blood cells, and supplies 
oxygen in the body parts (Vayu). Kapha relates to 
fluids. Vdsdk, bald, harltakl, bibhltakl, pippall. 


Gland Definitions 

Exocrine: Channels that open into the organs, 
gastrointestinal tract, bloodstream, etc. (e.g., salivary 
glands, intestinal or digestive glands, mammary 
glands). 





























The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Endocrine: Secrete directly into the bloodstream or 
the surrounding tissues. They do not have any 
channel, such as the exocrine glands. Examples are 
hormones. 

Thyroid: Responsible for the growth, calcium, and 
metabolism in the body. Thyroxin discharge 
(Kapha) digests the seven tissues (dhatus) and 
develops the mind and body. 

Hyperthyroid: Disturbs the mind and body, increases 
the reflex action, causes fine tremors and 
palpitations, exophthalmic goiter, and neurosis. 
Hypothyroid: Causes slowed thyroid functioning. 
Symptoms include anemia and Vayu obesity; low 
heart rate, infertility, neuritis, goiter, exophthalmia 
(protrusion of the eyeball), photophobia (fear of 
light), and sweating. 

Parathyroid: Regulates the calcium metabolism level 
in the body. 

Pineal: (Kapha) Controls the brain. 

Thalamus: Responsible for the early childhood 
growth until approximately age 15. 
Hypothalamus: (Vayu) Located in the brain, 
controlling the pituitary gland and other hormones. 
Pituitary: (Pitta/Kapha) Controls all other hormone 
functions and levels in the body. It sits on top of the 
sushumna (the spiritual tube inside the spine), 
anterior, and posterior lobes. It is in the spinal 
column 

Suprarenal: This secretes the hormone that controls 
the fight or flight response. Thus, muscular activity 
and glucose in the blood are increased. 


Hemispheres 
of the brain 



Vagus Nerve 




The vagus nerve is controlled by the thalamus. It 
mns from the brain to the stomach. Vagus is the 10th 
cranial nerve supplying the heart, stomach, 
diaphragm, sensory-motor skills, voice, breathing, 
pharynx, and esophagus. These areas are affected by 
all three doshas. When there is any reflex or response 
from any of these organs, it signals the brain. The 
response from the brain is transmitted back to all the 
organs (not just the one signaling trouble). In this way, 
if one organ is ill, it affects the functioning of all the 
other related organs. 





































Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 26: Miscellaneous 


Torso Organs and Their Ruling Doshas 


Tonsils/Adenoids (K) 


Lungs (Tridoshic) 


Liver (P) 

Gall Bladder (P) 

Duodenum 

upper (K) 
lower (P) 

Pancreas 

insuline (K) 
acid (P) 

Ascending Colon (V/P) 
Appendix (K/P) 



Thyroid (P/K) 
Parathyroid (V/K) 


Heart (P/V) 


Stomach (Tridoshic) 
Spleen (P) 


Descending Colon (V) 


Small Intestine (P) 


Adrenals (K/P) 




Peritoneal Layer: This is a membranous sheath cov¬ 
ering all the visceral organs, and protecting them 
against friction, separating them, etc. 

Sub-Doshas Organs: All five Pitta sub-doshas disturb 
one’s spiritual life. Sadhaka Pitta and Avalbaka Kapha 
create the most energy disturbances on one’s spiritual 
path. 

The combination of the two is called Sam 
Awostha (balance period). Bodhak Kapha relates to 
the taylin (mucus gland). 


Times And Methods To Take Herbs 

Stomach disorders are healed by ingesting herbs. 
Head disorders are removed through the nose. 
Colon diseases are healed through enemas. 
Strong persons take herbs in the morning on an empty 
stomach. 

Weak persons mix herbs with a light meal or snack. 
Stool, urine, gas, semen, menstrual, and pregnancy 


herbs (apdna) Herbs are taken before meals (i.e., 
disorders related to the lower body). 

Pervasive ills ( samdna) Herbs are taken during lunch. 
Vyan disorders Herbs are taken after breakfast and 
lunch. 

Udan diseases Herbs are taken after dinner. 

Prana ills Herbs are taken between bites of food. 
Cough, thirst and difficult breathing Herbs are used 
frequently. 






































The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Hiccup: Herbs are taken with delicious foods. 

Some practitioners say for Vayu conditions, herbs 
are taken before meals to quickly reach these lower 
areas; Pitta conditions require herbs with meals to 
affect the middle portion of the body (Pitta organs); 
herbs are used immediately following meals for 
Kapha conditions to help with upper torso conditions. 

Herbal Recipes 

Arteriosclerosis: Yogaraj guggul, turmeric, aloe, 
safflower, myrrh. 

Athlete’s foot: Pitta (infections), Kapha (white). 
Turmeric and guduchl for infections; Tea-tree oil for 
Kapha (internally and externally). 

Broken bones: Manjishtha, arjuna, comfrey, 
Solomon’s seal, horsetail (internally and externally); 
yogaraj or pure guggul). 

Cholesterol: Purified guggul. 

Circulation (poor): Saffron, turmeric, cinnamon, black 
pepper, ajwan, cloves; trikatu for Vayu or Kapha 
(yogaraj guggul for Vayu; pure guggul for Kapha); 
Kaishore guggul, turmeric, manjishtha, saffron, 
coriander for Pitta. Other herbs that help circulation 
include brdhmi, dmalaki, and bald. 

Colic: Fennel, chamomile. 

Dandruff: Multani mitti or curd and sesame oil 
Depression: Saffron, jasmine, patchouli, and ylang 
ylang aromas. 

Ear disorders: Nirgundi, ghee ear baths. 

Eczema: Brdhmi, bhrihgardj. 

Encephalitis (brain inflammation): Jatdmdnshl, 
brdhmi, sandalwood; 2 to 6 drops of shaclbindu oil. 
Eye disorders: Nirgundi, triphald, guduchl, shweta 
punarnavd. 

Food allergies: Foods that increase one’s dosha often 
cause allergic reactions. Allergies are also related to 
a weak immune system. Therefore, eating foods and 
taking immune boosting herbs according to one’s 
dosha is advised. 

Gangrene: Echinacea. 

Gums (bleeding): Massage gums with coconut oil or 
drink juice of 1/2 lemon in a cup of water. 
Hang nail: A Vayu excess (Vayu-reducing herbs) 
Hemorrhoids: 1/2 cup aloe vera juice 3 times daily. 
Triphald is also useful. 


Hodgkin’s: Jasmine. 

Immune: Brdhmi, guduchl. 

Incontinence: Skullcap (V+), nutmeg (P+). 

Liver: bhudmalakl, aloe vera gel, katukd, guduchl, 
brdhmi, bhrihgardj, chirdyatd. 

Mastitis: Marshmallow, bald. 

Meningitis (brain edema): Jatdmdnshl, yogaraj 
guggul, brdhmi, musk, badam (almonds). 
Menstrual Cramps: 1 tablespoon aloe vera gel with 
1/4 teaspoon black pepper 3 times daily. 
Mononucleosis: Chyavan prdsh and jatdmdnshl. 
Mouth disorders: Triphald. 

Nail deposits (under nail): Vayu and Kapha (local 
mucus). Vayu/Kapha-reducing herbs. 

Pain, aches, arthritis, back pain, strains, etc.: Ginger 
and water paste compress; or mahdndrdyan oil 
equally mixed with sesame oil; saffron, turmeric. 
P/K Ama: Six cloves of garlic well chopped, boiled 
in a cup of milk until it is reduced by half. Add cane 
sugar. Taken once daily for 1st week; every other day 
for the following week. After that, once or twice a 
week until ama is cleared. 

Pleurisy: Licorice and honey to prevent Kapha ex¬ 
cess. 

Psoriasis: Brdhmi, manjishtha, barberry. 

Shock: Sinus congestion—inhale one pinch of vachd 
powder. 

Sore throat: Gargle with hot water mixed with tur¬ 
meric, guggul, pippall, ginger, triphald, and black 
pepper. 

Sprue (grahanl): [ama causes constipation or 
diarrhea]. Herbs include kutaj, bilwa, ginger. 

Stings & Bites: Drink cilantro juice and apply 
sandalwood paste externally. 

Swollen knees/ankles: 2 lb. salt bag heated in a pan 
and kept on the swelling for 5 minutes a day. 
Swollen legs: Castor oil and half cooked rice mixed 
into a paste and massaged on the swelling. TB: Vdsdk, 
vamsha lochana. 

Toothache: Apply 3 drops of clove oil to tooth. 
Varicose Veins: (Vayu) Shoulder stands (10 minutes 
daily). W ^ 











































Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 26: Miscellaneous 


Mutually Contradictory Foods 

Milk and Fish (hot and cold, respectively) vitiate the 
blood and obstruct circulatory channels. 

Meat with honey, sesame seeds, sugar, milk, lotus 

stalk, or grains, causes deafness, blindness, trembling, 
loss of intelligence, causes voice to sound nasal, may 
cause death. 

Milk after radish or garlic may cause obstinate s ki n 
diseases. 

Milk with sour foods and drinks 

Honey and ghee in equal quantities or honey, ghee 

and water in equal quantities, causes a subtle toxic 

reaction. 

Drinking hot water after taking honey is 

contraindicated. 

With very few exceptions, mutually contradictory 
foods cause sterility, blindness, s ki n diseases, ascites, 
eruptions, insanity, fistula, fainting, and intoxication. 
They can also cause tympanitis, throat spasms, 
anemia, ama poisoning, sprue, edema, acid 
indigestion, fever, rhinitis, fetal diseases, and death. 
These diseases are healed through emesis, purgation, 
antidotes, and can be prevented by protective 
measures. 

The exceptions to mutually contradictory foods 
include, milk with garlic, and hot water after honey 
for emesis. 


Herbal Preparation and Use 

Fresh Juice (Swarasa) 

Extracting the juice from fresh herbs (by crushing 
or pounding) has the most potent healing effect. With 
few exceptions (e.g., ginger and cilantro), it is difficult 
to obtain fresh Ayurvedic herbs for juicing. Each of 
the remaining preparations have slightly less potency 
than the previous, with confections containing the 
least degree of potency. 

Decoctions (Kwatha) 

Decoctions are made by boiling herbs in water over 
a low flame until 1/2 the amount of water remains. 
Decoctions are best suited for roots, stems, bark, and 
fruit, because it takes longer to transfer the energies 


from these parts of the plant to the decoction liquid 
(flower and leaf energy is quickly transferred). 

Decoction Recipe: 1 part dry herbs to 16 parts water 
or 1/2 ounce of herbs to 8 ounces of water. The 8 
cups of water are boiled over a low flame until half 
the amount (2 ounces) remains. The herb’s energies 
are now transferred to the liquid from the dry herb. 
Herbs are then strained and the decoction is taken. 

Sometimes mi lk decoctions are especially useful 
for enhancing herbal properties as for ashwagandha 
and shatavari. A traditional recipe for ashwagandha 
mi lk decoction is 1/4 ounce ashwagandha to 1/4 cup 
milk to 1 cup water. This mixture is boiled over a low 
flame until the water evaporates. Less water can be 
used when using herbs in powdered form. 

Hot Infusions (Phanta) 

One ounce of herbs is mixed with 8 ounces of water 
(1:8 ratio) for hot infusions. After the water has boiled, 
the flame is turned off, and herbs are added to the 
water. The herbs are allowed to steep up between 1/2 
hour to 12 hours, during which time their energies 
are transferred to the water. Then, herbs are strained 
before drinking the infusion. 

Aromatic herbs, non-woody plants, leaves, and 
flowers are best suited to hot infusion because their 
energies are easily transferred and would be destroyed 
through boiling. When a formula requires a mixture 
of herbs (e.g., roots and flowers), the roots are boiled 
and the flowers are added and steeped. 

Cold Infusions (Hima) 

Herbal powders release their energies more 
quickly than raw herbs, so they are left to steep in 
cold water from 1 hour to overnight (overnight is the 
preferred time). As with hot infusions, cold infusions 
are best for delicate parts of the herbs. This method 
offers the further advantage of preserving herbs which 
have cooling or refrigerant properties. Pitta-reducing 
therapies are best suited to this method of preparation. 
Herbs include jasmine, sandalwood, mint, etc. 




















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Wet Pill, Paste, Bolus (Kalka) 

Fresh or dried herbs are rubbed on a stone and 
mixed with a small quantity of water until they 
become a soft paste. This preparation is applied 
externally as a paste to heal wounds, sores, etc. It can 
also be taken internally. Some recipes call for the 
addition of sweets or liquids. Twice the amount of 
raw honey, ghee, or oil may be added to the paste; an 
equal amount of jaggery may be added, and 4 times 
the amount of any other liquid is added. 

Powders (Churnas) 

Dried herbs are ground in a mortar and pestle or 
with an herb grinding machine; and strained into a 
fine powder. They are easily mixed with other herbs 
and have quick acting properties in the body. However, 
they stay in the body for only a few hours, and their 
shelf life is not as long as that of pills and other 
compounds. 

Traditionally powdered mixtures used 20 or more 
different herbs per formula. Powders are best taken 
with ghee, raw sugar, or raw honey; which transport 
the herb’s energies to all seven tissue layers. The ratio 
of herbs to vehicle is 1:2. If milk or water is used as a 
vehicle, they are used in a ratio of 4:1 to herbs. 

Powders work best for the gastrointestinal tract and 
on the plasma tissue (rasa dhatu); with the exception 
of rejuvenative herbs like ashwagandha, triphala, 
shatdvari, etc., that work on all seven tissues. 
Traditional powdered (churna) formulas include 
lav an bhdskar, triphala, sitopaladi, hihgwastdk, and 
sudarshan churnas. 

Pills (Guti and Vati) 

Pills not only include herbs, but also powdered 
herbal extracts and burnt minerals and metals. These 
make the pill more potent, offering a quicker and more 
effective healing process. Pills also remain in the body 
longer than powders and have a longer shelf life. 
When pills are made with burnt metals and minerals 
(bhasmas), the longer the pills are stored the more 
potent they become. 

Traditional pills include lashunadi vati, 
chandraprabha vati, kutajghan vati, yogardj guggul, 
and kaishore guggul. 


Confections (Avaleha) 

This is the solid mass obtained from boiling a 
decoction. Sugar or liquid is added in 4 times the 
quantity, while jaggery is only double the quantity of 
the mass. This makes a confection. They are best taken 
with boiled milk, cane juice, or decoction. Chyavan 
prdsh is perhaps the most well known confection. 
Being sweet in nature, children like to eat the 
confection. Often avalehas are used as tonics and 
rejuvenatives. Different confections help different 
disorders. 


Medicated Ghee and Oil (Sneha) 

Oils work primarily on the skin, blood, lungs, and 
colon; they cannot reach the deeper tissue layers 
because their heavy nature is difficult for the liver to 
digest (the colon will have some effect on the nerves, 
however). 

The recipe for sneha is 1 part herb paste to 4 parts 
ghee or oil to 4 parts of any decoction (or 16 parts 
water). They are cooked over a low flame for 4 to 8 
hours until the water evaporates. When water is 
sprinkled into the oil or ghee, it will crackle; the 
preparation is now ready. 

When the delicate parts of the plant (i.e., leaf or 
flower) or aromatic herbs are used they may be 
directly added to the pre-cooked oil or ghee and left 
to sit for 24 to 48 hours before they are strained. 

Herbs are empowered by this process, providing 
quick and strong healing or rejuvenation. Snehas are 
used internally, in the nose, eyes, head, as enemas, 
and elsewhere. Traditional oil formulas include 
brdhmi ghee, brdhmi, mahdndrdyan, dashmul, anu, 
mahabhrifigaraj, triphala ghee, pinda oil, and shad 
bindu. 







Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 26: Miscellaneous 


Medicated or Fermented Wines 
(Asavas, Arishthas) 

Asavas are prepared in cold water without boiling 
the herbs. Arishthas involve boiling the herbs. Fer¬ 
menting agents are added to these mixtures (e.g., 
jaggery, dhatki) which are then stored at specific tem¬ 
peratures for a number of days, weeks, or months. 
This form of herbology is the Ayurvedic version of 
western liquid extracts, only more potent. These wines 
are easily and instantly absorbed into the blood stream 
(even if one has trouble digesting herbal pills or pow¬ 
ders); improve digestive fire, and contain no alcohol. 
Traditional wines include baldsava, kutajdrishtha, 
drakshasava, arjundrishtha, pahchdsava. 


Extracts 


Herbal powdered extracts along with or instead 
of plain herb powders have become the industry stan¬ 
dard. Extracts can offer a guaranteed potency of more 
than 3 to 6 times the power of plain herbs. Giloy 
Sattwa is a traditional Ayurveda powdered of extract 
of guduchl. Purified guggul is another common ex¬ 
tract. In the U.S., many extracts are now offered in¬ 
cluding garcinia (tamarind) and turmeric. 

There are 2 approaches to extraction. The com¬ 
mon method is to take the active ingredients out of 
the whole herb. Newer methods to extract the whole 
plant yet guaranteed potency levels have been devel¬ 
oped by Zandu Pharmacies of Bombay. This approach 
is more in fine with Ayurvedic thinking because it 
uses the entire herb. In this method, one receives the 
properties of whole herb as mother nature has in¬ 
tended. 


By only using so-called “active ingredients,” we 
are assuming that the other ingredients play no role 
in the healing process when they may actually pre¬ 
vent side effects or direct the healing effects of the 
herb to its appropriate site. Thus, the whole plant ex¬ 
tract retains the integrity of the herb, ensuring safety 
and efficacy. 



Minerals and Metals (Rasas) 

Seven metals are used along with herbs in certain 
powerful preparations. The 7 metals (gold, silver, 
brass, copper, lead, tin, and magnetic iron-ore) relate 
to the 7 dhatus (tissue layers). These 7 plus 2 
additional metals relate to the nine planets: copper/ 
Sun, silver/Moon, bras s/Mars, lead/Mercury, gold/ 
Jupiter, tin/Venus, steel/Saturn, bronz e/Rahu, 
magnetic iron-or e/Ketu. These metals undergo precise 
purification processes to remove toxins and make 
them digestible. 

When the metals undergo these alchemical 
processes they are used for rejuvenation (rasdyanas) 
therapy. For example, therapies for healing amebic 
parasites include antiparasitical herbs and immune- 
boosting herbs. Formulas sold in India include kutaj 
(antiparasitical) and mercury bhasma (immune- 
boosting ash). Bhasmas (metal, mineral, and gem ash) 
are common to many Ayurvedic products in India. 
Some of the bhasmas have not yet been approved for 
use in the U.S. by the FDA. Many European countries, 
however, allow importation of these bhasmas. 

Metals, gems, minerals (mica, red coral, sea shells) 
are burnt into ash ( bhasma) in a very specific process, 
thereby removing all toxic properties. If these items 
are improperly prepared, ingesting them can be life- 
threatening. Even in India, only a few Ayurvedic 
companies are viewed as reliable manufacturers of 
bhasmas. So caution is strongly advised when 
considering the use of certain bhasmas. 


Mercuy conquers all diseases 
and confers strength. 

Shamgadhara Samhita: 
Ch. 12; verse 1 


Herb Mixing 

Dose: The herbal dose depends on many factors, 
e.g., the strength of the person, the herb, the disease 
or disorder, the season, and geographic location. For 
example, doses given to person in India are generally 
2 to 4 times higher than those required or tolerated 





The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


by persons in the U.S. For mild conditions found in 
the U.S., 1/4 to 1/2 tsp. of powdered herbs; 3 times 
daily is adequate to produce desired healing results. 
For more chronic mental or physical problems, 1/2 
to 1 teaspoon, 3 times daily is needed. Yet even in 
these cases, it is wise to allow gradual build-up from 
smaller doses to the full dose so that the system can 
adjust to the herbs. In extreme conditions (e.g., 
cancer), 1 to 3 ounces daily are required for certain 
tissue layer (dhatus) healing. 

Children’s doses have been discussed in Chapter 
23. From birth to one month, herbs are given in 
quantities of approximating 2 rice grains, with raw 
honey, milk, ghee, or syrup (herbs may also be 
received through breast milk). This quantity is 
augmented by 2 grains each month until age 15 to a 
maximum dose of 1/16 teaspoon. 

Pet Care: Pets (horses, cats, dogs) respond extremely 
well to herbs. Animals are so intuitive they often at¬ 
tack the bag or bottle of herbs before their owner can 
even give them the product. At our U.S. center, we 
have found that pets only require 1/16 to 1/8 teaspoon 
of herbs for most disorders; even chronic ones. Since 
it is difficult to take the pulse of a pet, deciding on 
appropriate therapies is achieved through observing 
symptoms and medical reports prepared by the vet¬ 
erinarian. 


Mixing: Mixing herb powders is a fairly simple pro¬ 
cess so long as the tridoshic theory is followed. Keep 
in mind the effects each herb has on a particular dosha, 
disorder, organ, and tissue layer. For example, if a 
Vayu dosha person needs a brain tonic, Vayu-reduc- 
ing or tridoshic brain tonic herbs are used, such as 
ashwagandha, jatcimdnshl, or brdhml. An herb l ik e 
skullcap, although useful for insomnia and nervous¬ 
ness, will aggravate the Vayu dosha if used in ex¬ 
cess. Thus, skullcap can be completely avoided or 
mixed with warming herbs such as cinnamon to bal¬ 
ance out its cooling effect. 

Another example of herb personalization is high 
blood pressure. Although garlic is a well-known herb 
for hypertension, in Ayurveda it is helpful for Vayu- 
and Kapha-caused hypertension; it will aggravate 


Pitta-related high blood pressure. If a person is a dual 
dosha, herbs that increase the third dosha arc used. 
For example if a person is a Pitta-Kapha dosha and 
has a Pitta-Kapha health concern, such as bronchitis 
(Kapha symptoms) with an infection (yellow or green 
mucus/Pitta secondary symptoms), then Vayu-in- 
creasing lung herbs are used (e.g., vdsdk). The Vayu 
energies cool the excess Pitta (infection), dry the ex¬ 
cess Kapha (phlegm), and the herb directs these en¬ 
ergies directly to the lungs. When looking at this bal¬ 
ancing effect from the view of the six tastes, the bit¬ 
ter taste is responsible for healing. Bitter herbs often 
have antibiotic proprieties (e.g., goldenseal). 

When tridoshic disorders are involved (all three 
doshas are present), tridoshic herbs are required. If 
these herbs are not specific enough to affect healing 
then herbs are used to heal (reduce) the dosha causing 
the most problems. As this condition improves, should 
another dosha become aggravated due to ingesting 
the herbs being used, then herbs should be changed 
to balance this newly developed condition. 
Unquestionably, tridoshic cases are the most difficult 
situations to deal with. 

Sometimes subtle uses of the herbs come into play. 
If one has an opportunity to effect healing using 
sattwic (holy) herbs (e.g., brahm! or tulsl,) instead of 
tamasic or rajasic herbs (e.g., garlic, onions, valerian), 
then subtler spiritual benefits can develop as well. 
However, if needed for physical healing, tamasic and 
rajasic herbs must be used for some time. 

Directing herbs to the proper organ should also be 
considered. Certain herbs, such as gokshura break 
up urinary stones. Coriander is mixed with gokshura 
to direct its healing effect to break up gallstones. 

To summarize the rules discussed: 

1) Use tridoshic herbs. 

2) Use herbs that reduce one’s dosha. 

3) If using herbs that increase one’s dosha, add other 
herbs that balance the herb’s effects (i.e., add sec¬ 
ondary herbs that will reduce the dosha). Even if these 
herbs are not specifically used for that condition, they 
will balance the effects of the primary herb. 








Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 26: Miscellaneous 


4) Dual -dosha disorders require herbs that increase 
the third dosha (i.e., reduce both doshas) 

5) When tridoshic conditions require non-tridoshic 
herbs, constant switching of herbs is needed for bal¬ 
ance depending upon the predominant dosha. 

6) Antibiotic or other specific concern herbs can 
be used. 

7) Sattwic herbs are preferred over tamasic or 
rajasic herbs as long as they affect healing. 

8) Secondary herbs may need to be used to direct 
the main herb to a specific organ or tissue. 


Pitta/Kapha Balancing 


Excess 


Balance 


Deficient 



Pitta 

Kapha 


T 


T 



Vayu 


Taste 

Quality 

Dosha 

Reduced 

Sweet 

moist, cool 

Vayu/Pitta 

Sour 

hot 

Vayu/Kapha 

Salty 

hot 

Vayu 

Pungent 

hot 

Kapha 

Bitter 

cold, light 

Pitta/Kapha 

Astringent 

cold 

Pitta/Kapha* 

Dosha 

Element 

Qualities 

Vayu 

ether, air 

cold, dry 

Pitta 

fire, water 

hot, moist 

Kapha 

water, earth 

wet, cold, 
heavy 


* Sometimes astringent tastes will aggravate Kapha. 


The above chart explains how a Pitta/Kapha dosha 
excess is balanced. Pitta and Kapha are in excess, 
and Vayu is deficient. Herbs and foods that increase 
Vayu and reduce Pitta and Kapha, are incorporated 
into one’s life; whereas items that increase Pitta and 
Kapha are avoided or reduced. Thus, the energies of 
Vayu (e.g., cool, dry) will reduce the effects of Pitta 
(hot) and Kapha (dampness, phlegm). This tridosha 
theory is discussed in detail in Chapters 3 and 6. Be¬ 
low is a review of this theory. 

If Pitta is in excess, heat is the main experience. 
Herbs that are cooling (sweet, bitter, and astringent) 
will balance the heat (i.e., reduce the heat). If Kapha 
is excessed, moistness (phlegm) is predominant or 
imbalanced in the individual. Herbs that are hot, pun¬ 
gent, and bitter will balance or reduce the moisture 
by their drying nature. When Pitta and Kapha are in 
excess, heat and moistness are the predominant symp¬ 
toms. Bitter-tasting herbs will reduce both Pitta and 
Kapha doshas (astringent tastes may aggravate the 
earth element of Kapha, and pungent or hot tastes 
will aggravate or increase the Pitta element). Thus, 
bitter tastes will reduce Pitta and Kapha. See the tables 
below. 


When choosing herbs for a specific health con¬ 
cern, it is advisable to find an herb that works best 
for the situation. For example mahjishthd is the best 
blood purifier. Other blood-cleansing herbs can then 
be added to the mixture, such as brahml and turmeric. 
Two to 4 times as much of the main herb ( mahjishthd) 
is used with the secondary herbs (2:1:1). Conditions 
associated with the main problem are also addressed. 
Should the liver also need detoxifying, liver-cleans¬ 
ing herbs are added to the mixture. Brahml also 
cleanses the liver, so it helps both conditions. How¬ 
ever, if the liver requires serious attention, bhud- 
malaki, the best liver cleanser, may be necessary to 
add to the formula. 


'V 





























The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


If blood purification is the predominating concern, 
then less bhuamalakl is used (one or two parts). If the 
liver needs as much attention as the blood, then equal 
amounts of bhuamalakl and manjishthd are used (2:2). 
One part coriander can be added to the formula to 
help digest the herbs, making them more effective and 
quick acting. If mental stress has caused the disorder, 
then brahmi would also be added to the formula to 
balance the mind. 

If the person with this Pitta condition is a pure Pitta 
dosha, this would be an acceptable formula. If they 
are a Pitta/Vayu dosha, then bhuamalakl may be too 
aggravating for Vayu. Brahmi or bhrihgardj can be 
used instead of bhuamalakl. When herbs cannot be 
found to heal a condition without aggravating one’s 
dosha (in this example, Vayu) the rule is to choose 
herbs that will heal the excessed condition (in this 
case the blood and liver) and watch for any Vayu- 
excess symptoms. 

To summarize 

1) The best herb for a condition should dominate 
the formula. 

2) Other herbs can be used in smaller amounts. 3) 
Herbs used for secondary conditions are added in 
lesser amounts. 

4) If two conditions are equally predominant, use 
the one herb that will help both conditions, or separate 
herbs for both conditions and use them in equal 
quantities. 

5) Include herbs that digest the other herbs, 
thereby saving digestive energy and improving the 
absorption of the herbs. 



Vessels and Cooking 

The nature of the pot used to cook herbs (and 
foods) affects the final preparation. Aluminum, for 
example, is absorbed into the body as a poison. The 
best cooking materials are: 

Kapha-reducing: Clay and copper (scraping and 
reducing properties) 

Pitta-reducing: Brass or silver (cooling properties) 
Vayu-reducing: Iron (grounding properties) 
Cooking over a flame (gas or wood) is better than 
using electric heat because it empowers the herbs and 
foods, making them more easily digestible. Wood fires 
are best, microwaves are not recommended. 


Ayurvedic Acupuncture 
(Bhedan Karma) 

In the three major Ayurvedic texts, discussions 
of surgery and marma points also involved Ayurvedic 
acupuncture or “needling,” and moxibustion. The use 
of needles was used for both surgical and non-surgical 
healing. According to Dr. Frank Ross, author of The 
Lost Secrets of Ay wyedic Acupuncture; acupuncture 
was taught in Indian schools at least as early as 100 
B.C. Students included Chinese visitors. 

Very little information about Ayurvedic 
acupuncture is available in India today. It was first 
recorded in the Suchi Veda (science of needling) about 
3,000 years ago. Since this is a very detailed science, 
the topic is merely mentioned here. For a more 
detailed explanation of the subject, please read Dr. 
Ros’ book. 







Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 27: Outer Healing 


All human activities are meant for happiness of all living beings. 
Such happiness is based on dharma (righteousness, right moral conduct). 
Hence, every person should always adopt righteousness. 
Ashtanga Hridayam Su. Ch. 2: ver. 20 


Chapter 27 
Outer Healing 

Beauty Care, Environmental Balancing: Jyotish, 
Vastu Shastra & Feng Shui, Scientific Research 


veryone has heard the sayings, ‘beauty is 
only s ki n deep’, and ‘beauty is in the 
eyes of the beholder.’ It is also 
commonly said that people in love always look 
beautiful. Ayurveda suggests that when persons 
have high self-worth or see the Divine within, they 
radiate true beauty. Thus, outer beauty is a 
reflection of inner beauty. 

In Western cultures, the aging process of men 
has always been seen as beauty (handsome). 
However, the value and beauty of women more 
than 40-years-old seem to be ignored. Beauty has 
a much different definition in the ancient cultures, 
where, as both males and females grow older (and 
look older), beauty is said to grow. In other words, 
wisdom that comes with age is valued as a deeper 
beauty. This is a striking contrast to modern hi- 
tech cultures that see superficial, youthful faces as 
a sign of true beauty. 

Still, if persons take care of their health and 
cultivate their ethics, health and inner beauty 
radiates even through the skin. Ayurveda adds a 
spiritual dimension to the definition of beauty by 
saying: 

Inner peace brings outer beauty 

It is Divinity that is true beauty, that is, eternal 
and Divine love. Mental peace is the source of 
Divine beauty and develops as one realizes their 
Divinity. As each person sees their inner Self as 
Divine, they grow in beauty, both internally and 
externally. There are 3 aspect to beauty: inner, 


outer, and genetic or karmic beauty. 

Outer beauty relates to bone structure, skin tone, 
muscle development, intelligence, hair quality, 
youthfulness, and weight. The Vedic sciences, such 
as Ayurveda and Vedic Astrology, discuss outer 
beauty as an integrated by-product of inner beauty 
and virtue. 

Karmic beauty results from genetic traits. Also, 
each person has varying degrees of grace, which 
enhance beauty. These karmic traits are enhanced 
through being raised to develop compassion, 
understanding, love, patience, sharing, and 
nurturing that which is in harmony with nature. 
This is a more fundamental aspect of beauty. 

Inner beauty mainly requires development of 
virtue. One of the main Ayurvedic texts, the Charak 
Samhita , specifically notes that longevity can be 
achieved through being ethical and virtuous. This 
aspect of character is a part of the process of 
developing and maintaining beauty. It, too, is more 
essential than mere outer beauty. 

Besides ethics and virtue, healthy eating habits 
and life style are also necessary for inner beauty 
to radiate into outer beauty. Cleanliness is next to 
Godliness, and keeping the body clean is a twofold 
process: Externally, one should wash and apply 
healthy and nurturing cosmetics. Internal cleansing 
is developed through eating foods according to 
one’s Ayurvedic constitution, virtue, and prayer 
or meditation. This helps develop a positive self- 
image or healthy self-love. 

Further, one’s life habits must be considered. 







The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Avoiding staying up late, excessive work, and 
overexposure to elements like sun, cold, and 
dryness is essential. In short, one should take 
control of or balance their outer and inner lives. 

The four areas of life have already been 
discussed (health, harmonious career, spiritual 
relationships, and direct spiritual development). 
The truly beautiful person is then defined as one 
who is healthy, loves their career, and has a 
relationship that helps them grow spiritually. These 
persons also find adequate time to develop their 
inner spiritual Self. 

Thus, outer beauty cannot by itself bring true 
and lasting beauty. Even those who are physically 
beautiful must feel some inner connection—some 
purpose to life to feel truly beautiful. Looking and 
feeling beautiful are two separate aspects. An 
ancient Vedic story tells of inner, spiritual beauty 
being stronger than superficial beauty: 

Parvati was the loveliest goddess in all the 
world. She wanted to marry Shiva, the Divine God. 
Yet even with all her beauty, Shiva’s meditations 
could not be disturbed. Seeing that mere physical 
attraction was insufficient, Parvati underwent 
developing her ethics, virtue, and health, and spent 
many long years enhancing her own spirituality 
through meditation. One day, by the mere purity 
of her soul, Shiva was aroused from His 
meditations to see who it was who was so devoted 
to God. When He saw the radiance of 
her Divine beauty, He accepted her wish to be 
married. 

Throughout this book, it is explained how to 
develop inner beauty through meditation, proper 
diet, ethics, a positive self-image, and various 
therapies, such as aroma therapy, yoga, and 
abhyahga (a massage-like therapy). These are the 
essential ingredients for developing a true and 
lasting aura of beauty. 

We will now spend some time discussing how 
to develop and maintain outer beauty through 
natural methods. For example, using makeup that 
removes symptomatic signs of aging can harm the 
s ki n and poison the body with chemicals. It will 
eventually destroy one’s outer looks and undermine 
one’s inner health and spiritual beauty as well. Just 
as we have discussed foods that enhance and 


balance a person, according to their constitution, 
natural makeup, shampoo, and facials are also 
available for each person’s constitution. 


Skin: Sensitivity & Healing 

Besides the seven doshas (Vayu-Air, Pitta-Fire, 
Kapha-Water, Vayu/Pitta, Vayu/Kapha, Pitta/ 
Kapha, Tridoshic (all three dosha s)), a special 
category exists known as changing skin conditions. 
Despite one’s dosha, skin conditions 
change depending upon one’s diet, exercise, and 
the climate. Sensitivity towards cold, dryness, and 
the sun may exist. It is important to remember that 
it takes the body between 3 and 5 years to adjust 
to good or bad eating habits and climate. 

This is one reason that Ayurveda suggests 
gradual changes towards building a healthier life¬ 
style. It takes time for a toxic body to be 
cleanses; new cells and tissues built; and a new 
way of life and health to develop. Below are 
some Ayurvedic beauty care tips. 

Post-Surgery : When the skin becomes scarred 
from surgery, herbs help heal the tissues. Aloe vera 
gel and mahjishthd are the main recommendations. 

Acne : Not only do teenagers get acne, but also 
many adults suffer from this condition. Acne is 
generally an excess of Pitta (fire). Therefore, 
Ayurveda approaches acne from both symptomatic 
and causal levels. To remove symptoms, turmeric 
creme and sandalwood soap, found in most Indian 
grocery store, work very quickly. 

Simultaneously, one also should reduce the 
causes—the excess fire and toxins inside the body. 
If neglected, Pitta and toxins will cause 
acne to reappear, or manifest as illness in another 
part of the body (e.g., eyes, liver, spleen, gall 
bladder, heat, blood, and infections). 

For causal balancing or healing, persons should 
follow a fire- (Pitta) reduction diet (discussed in 
Chapter 6 and appendix 1). 







Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 27: Outer Healing 


Seasonal Conditions : Each season (see Chapter 12) 
has a predominance of Vayu (air), Pitta (fire), or 
Kapha (water). Ayurveda recommends that persons 
protect themselves from these environmental 
changes. 


Season 

Excess Dosha/ 
Symptoms 

Balance With 

Winter 

Vayu/Kapha 
cold/damp, poor 
circulation 

Pitta/warmth 
warm oils, 
herbs, foods 

Spring 

Kapha/water 
congestion/exce¬ 
ss toxins 
overweight 

Vayu/Pitta 
warm, dry oils, 
foods, herbs, 
steam 

Summer 

Pitta/Vayu 
hot/dry, acne, 
rashes 

Kapha/moist, 
cool powders, 
foods, herbs, 

creams 

Fall 

Vayu/cold 
windy, dry skin, 
wrinkles - signs 
of aging 

Pitta/Kapha 
warm/moist, 
oils, herbs, 
creams, foods 


Facial Cleansing 
Tridoshic Year-Round Cleansers 


Chandrika 
Ayurvedic soap 


Sandalwood soap 
(Kapha use only in 
Summer/Fall) 


Yayu Cleansing Formulas 
early evening/year-round cleansers 


Sandalwood/Almond (gentle astringent) 


6 drops sandalwood oil 


2 oz. almond oil 


4. oz. haritaki 


14 oz. water 


Put 4 oz. haritaki powder in 14 oz. of water 
until boiled. Strain herbs once water becomes 
tepid. Add sandalwood and almond oils. 

Vayu/Pitta Cleansing Formulas 
~ early afternoon and early evening/ 
year-round cleansers ~ 

Silver Sandalwood (astringent) 

1 tsp. sandalwood oil 

6 oz. vegetable glycerine 

4 tbs. mahjishtha 

10 oz. silver water 

Use 1 oz. of pure silver, or new silver quarters 
in 20 oz. spring water. Boil until half the water 
remains. Remove the silver and use the water 
for the cleansing formula. Boil silver water, 
mahjishthci, and glycerine. Remove and cool 
until tepid. Strain mahjishthci. Add warm 
sandalwood oil. Pour into a glass jar, cover, and 
shake thoroughtly. Keep in a cool place. 

Pitta Cleansing Formulas 
~ early afternoon/year-round cleansers ~ 

Silver Sandalwood (astringent) 

1 tsp. sandalwood oil 

6 oz. vegetable glycerine 

4 tbs. mahjishtha 

10 oz. silver water 

Use 1 oz. of pure silver, or new silver quarters 
in 20 oz. spring water. Boil until half the water 
remains. Remove the silver and use the water 
for the cleansing formula. Boil silver water, 
mahjishtha, and glycerine. Remove and cool 
until tepid. Strain mahjishtha. Add warm 
sandalwood oil. Pour into a glass jar, cover, and 
shake thoroughtly. Keep in a cool place. 

































The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Kapha Cleansing Formulas 
-late morning/year-round cleansers - 

Copper Eucalyptus 


6 drops eucalyptus oil 


6 oz. vegetable glycerine 


2 tbs. triphala 


10 oz. copper water 

1 oz. of copper or copper pennies can be 
cleaned by soaking them in lime juice for a few 
hours. Rinse the copper and add them to 20 oz. 

of spring water. Boil until half the water 
remains. Remove the copper and use the water 
for the cleansing formula. Boil copper water, 
triphala, and glycerine. Remove and set until 
tepid. Strain the triphala. Add eucalyptus oil. 

Pour into a glass jar, cover, and shake 
thoroughtly. Keep in a cool place. 


Vayu/Kapha Cleansing Formulas 
~ late morning & early evening/ 
year-round cleansers - 


Sandalwood-Eucalyptus 


3 drops sandalwood oil 


3 drops eucalyptus oil 


6 oz. vegetable glycerine 


4 oz. triphala 


14 oz. water 


Steep 4 oz. of triphala powder in 14 oz. of 
water until it boils. When tepid, strain the 
herbs. Add glycerine and bring to a boil. Add 
sandalwood and euclayptus oils and set until 
tepid. Pour into a glass jar, cover, and shake 
well. Store in a cool place. 


Pitta/Kapha Cleansing Formulas 
~ late morning & early afternoon/ 
year-round cleansers - 

Ylang-Ylang 


6 drops ylang-ylang oil 


6 oz. sunflower oil 


4 oz. triphala 


10 oz. water 


Bring triphala and water to a boil. When tepid, 
strain the herbs and add the oils. Pour into a 
glass jar, cover, and shake thoroughtly. Keep in 
a cool place. 

Press a warm (organic) cotton towel 
on the face for several minutes 

Eye Care 

Triphala and rose water may be used internally; 
and externally as eye washes. Boil one cup of 
water; add one teaspoon of triphala powder. Let it 
sit for at least 3 minutes. Pour the triphala tea 
through a coffee filter into another cup. Let the tea 
cool to room temperature before washing the eyes. 
Rose water may be used as an eye wash without 
boiling or straining. 

Kaial is a black cosmetic creme that is placed on 
the edges of the eyelids. This Ayurvedic 
preparation keeps dust and pollution out of the 
eyes, while enhancing their beauty. 

Lor more details on skin care and skin disorders, 
see Chapter 21. 



Jyotish - Vedic Astrology 

Jyotish means inner light. This science helps 
reveal one’s inner Divine light. Ayurveda and 




























Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 27: Outer Healing 


Jyotish were once a part of the same science, but 
later developed into two separate forms of healing. 
Although some may be skeptical towards astrology, 
when practiced correctly, Jyotish is an excellent 
tool for uncovering planetary-caused illnesses. 

This science follows the basic Vedic belief that 
there are four fundamental areas of life—each 
requiring attention: health, life-purpose or 
meaningful career ( dharma ), spiritual 
relationships, and tools for one’s spiritual path. 

By looking at the planets, the 12 houses and 
their relationship in the astrology chart, one can 
determine health tendencies, planetary causes of 
disease, dharma, necessities for spiritual 
relationships, and tools for one’s spiritual path. 

Every person has some strong and weak planets. 
Each planet, when weak and influencing health- 
related houses, can cause specific disease. Instead 
of merely informing a person of what the chart says 
through Vedic astrology; Jyotish additionally 
offers simple therapies to remove the troubling 
effects of planets. Therapies include mantras, 
yantras (talismans), meditations and rituals, herbs, 
aromas, gems, life-style, and spiritual suggestions. 
Therefore, like Ayurveda, Jyotish offers therapies 
so people can take control of their lives and effect 
healing. 

Planets 

Below are the nine traditional planets used in 
Jyotish, what they affect, and the corresponding 
mental and physical disorders that each planet can 
cause. 

Sun : Father, ego, Soul, honor 

Physical; arthritis or weak bones; low energy 
or resistance; pallor or anemia; cold limbs, poor 
appetite or digestion; weak pulse or heart; poor 
circulation or eyesight; edema or other disorders 
of water accumulation. 

Mental; low self-esteem or confidence; lack of 
motivation, emotional or material dependency; 
sluggishness or dull mindedness; difficulty with 
independence. 

Moon : Mother, emotions, personality, socializing, 


happiness, home, nurturing 

Physical; anemia, constipation, dry skin, weak 
lungs or kidneys; female reproductive disorders. 

Mental; depression, moodiness, ungrounded¬ 
ness, fear of intimacy or difficulty dealing with 
others. 

Mars : Brothers, friends/enemies, courage, injury, 
energy, logic, law 

Physical; lack of motivation or energy; unable 
to defend oneself or dominated by others; unable 
to express anger, unable to see through people’s 
motivations, overly passive, easily controlled or 
abused (emotionally or physically). 

Mental; weak immune system; appetite or 
absorption of nutrients; liver or small intestine 
disorders; anemia, injuries or slow healing of 
injuries; low male vitality. 

Mercury : Healing, communication (writing, 
computers, speaking), intelligence, childhood, 
commerce. 

Physical; weak nervous system, anxiety, 
insomnia, dry skin, palpitations or other nerve 
conditions; allergies, weak lungs or heart. 

Mental; difficulty communicating, immaturity 
or childishness; low intelligence, dependencies or 
addictions; dullness or daydreaming. 

Jupiter : Spirituality, guru, dharma, wealth, health, 
creativity, music, husband (for women) 

Physical; weak immune system or vitality; 
overly thin, liver or pancreas disorders; poor 
absorption of nutrients. 

Mental; lack of faith, enthusiasm, meaning, or 
will; feeling constricted, pessimism or depression; 
moodiness or melancholy; anxiety, unfriendliness, 
financial difficulties, low creativity. 

Venus : Relates to the arts (e.g., music, dance, art, 
song), love, vehicles, beauty, comfort, the wife (for 
husbands) 

Physical; weak kidneys, bones, or reproductive 
system; weak immune system or low energy; 
chronic urinary tract disorders, bleeding 
tendencies. 











The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Mental; lack of grace, charm, beauty, taste, or 
refinement; insensitivity or coarseness; feeling 
unloved or romantic difficulties; low feminine 
qualities. 

Saturn : Obstacles, delays, separation, longevity, 
spiritual discipline, spiritual oneness. 

Physical; weak bones or nerves; constipation, poor 
resistance or healing; mysterious diseases (e.g., 
cancer and epilepsy). 

Mental; agitation, stress, insomnia or 
ungroundedness; weak or easily intimidated; 
impractical, poor endurance or no long-term drive; 
troubles making money or with government or 
institutions. 

Rahu (North node of the Moon) : Disease, psyche, 
illusion, mass trends, higher visions, new karma 
Physical; weak immune or nervous system; 
insomnia, pallor, poor mind-body coordination; 
easily contracts diseases. 

Mental; disillusionment or poor perception; 
anxiety, moodiness, no self-identity, easily 
influenced, spreads oneself too thin. 

Ketu (South node of the Moon) : Liberation, 
constriction, loss, past karma 

Physical; poor digestion or circulation; ulcers, 
muscular or nervous system disorders; anemia or 
bleeding problems; mysterious diseases (e.g., 
cancer and paralysis). 

Mental; feeling constricted, attached to the past 
or lost causes; poor perception, self-destructive, 
injuries or violence; poor eyesight, low self-esteem. 

Houses 

Just as Western astrology, Jyotish uses the same 
12 houses and signs. Each house relates to another 
domain of life. Different astrologers (Jyotishis) 
have slightly different house interpretations. Below 
is a brief summary of the houses and areas of 
influence: 

1. Personality, health 

2. Education, livelihood potential, communication, 
childhood 

3. Courage, socializing, siblings 


4. Home, mother, material possessions, faith, travel 

5. Creativity, children, speculations, devotion 

6. Physical health, injury, litigation, enemies 

7. Long-term partner (e.g., spouse or business 
partner) 

8. Mental health, longevity, travel 

9. Dharma (life purpose), religion, fortune, father, 
honor 

10. Profession, achievement, recognition 

11. Material and spiritual gains 

12. Loss, liberation 

Charts 

Two main chart styles can be used, Northern 
and Southern, depending on one’s preference. 
Examples follow. 



NORTH INDIAN JYOTISH CHART 


M 

T 


n 

AM 

AM 



S3 




si 


TO. 

_n_ 

TO> 


SOUTH INDIAN JYOTISH CHART 


This science delves deeply into life and fully 
compliments Ayurveda. Read Astrology of the 
Seers by David Frawley for more information on 
the subject. 




















Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 27: Outer Healing 



Architectural Harmony: 

Vastu Shastra (External Kundalinl) 

The focus of this book has been on healing, 
prevention, and rejuvenation through Ayurvedic 
balance. This balance is achieved by living in 
accordance with nature’s laws. We have also 
discussed how meditation raises one’s inner life 
force or kundalinl Shakti. The raising of one’s 
kundalinl is essential for Self-Realization. We 
briefly discussed Vedic astrology (Jyotish) as 
another influence upon health, career, life-style, 
and spiritual development. 

The Vedic science of architecture, Vastu 
Shastra, integrates the sciences of Ayurveda and 
Jyotish by providing the link between humans and 
the astrological influences. Vcistu considers the 
magnetic fields of the earth, the influences of the 
planets and other heavenly bodies essential 
elements when designing commercial or residential 
buildings, temples, and even towns, villages, and 
cities. It is believed that architectural structures are 
alive, influenced by natural law, just as the health 
of humans is influenced by nature. Thus, living in 
a home (or working in an office) built according to 
natural law ensures general health and prosperity. 

Vastu’s integration of astrology, earth, health, 
science, and spirituality or religion is wonderfully 
evident as one reads through the Vastu texts. For 
example, in Hindu religion, the deity of the sun is 
said to ride in a chariot pulled by seven horses or 


deities. They are called the seven rays of the sun. It 
is important to have these rays enter eastern 
windows for health reasons. However, reading that 
it is useful to have these seven deities enter the 
home may raise the eyebrows of religious skeptics 
or persons of other religions. Yet these seven deities 
also happen to be called the seven visible colors of 
the spectrum of solar white light. In other words, 
violet, indigo, blue, green, yellow, orange, and red 
are merely the scientific names of these rays; 
whereas Vastu also uses their spiritual, religious, 
or mythological names. Thus, Vastu offers insights 
into the link between modem science and ancient 
universal religion or spirituality. It is only a matter 
of semantics whether to call the sun’s rays by the 
names of deities or colors of the spectrum. This 
semantic interchangeability of scientific and 
religious names is found in Ayurveda and the other 
Vedic sciences, as well as in most (if not all) ancient 
religions. 

Vastu describes other deities (light wavelengths) 
associated with the sun that cannot be detected by 
modem scientific instruments. Thus, the rules of 
Vastu offer deeper insights into the laws of nature 
that modem science has yet to discover. 

Since the focus of Ayurveda is holistic (i.e., all- 
inclusive), it is useful to consider harmonizing or 
balancing the external influences involving 
architectural structures. 

Vastu Shastra considers the quality of the soil, 
the shape and elevations of the land, the direction 
placement and the number of windows and doors; 
the thickness and height of walls and doors. In 
short, the minutest details of building are 
considered. 

Like Ayurveda and Jyotish, Vastu is also a 
spiritual science. The house is divided into a certain 
number of squares (e.g., 81 squares), and each 
square is ruled by different a deity. Window 
placement is determined according to the path of 
the sun, in order to allow the seven solar rays (or 
deities) to enter (bless) the house. For example, 
there are more windows in the east to receive the 
healing rays of the morning sunrise. 

Persons living or working in a Vastu- built 
structure experience the enhancement of health, 
general well being, and prosperity. This is due to 

































































The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


the external influences of natural law provided 
through the structure. 

The diagram below is one representative version 
of the blueprint that is overlaid on a building site. 
The rectangle represents the building. Each box 
inside the rectangle is ruled by a different deity. 
The four dark rectangles (made up of six smaller 
boxes) are ruled by one deity per dark box. 

Finally, the nine small boxes in the middle of 
the house are ruled by the main deity, Brahma. 
Traditionally, one does not have walls or pillars in 
the center of the house so as to leave room for 
Brahma. Thus, the building is seen as a very holy 
place. 

Further, the building is seen as a body. The head 
is in the upper right boxes. The arms run along the 
top and right outer boxes. The legs extend along 
the left and lower outer boxes. The heart resides in 
Brahma’s box. If one has a health problem, it is 
believed that part of the structure pertaining to that 
area of the house was not built in accordance with 
Vdstu natural law. 


In this way, Ayurveda and Jyotish are linked with 
the home, earth, and the natural laws that govern all 
things. 


Feng Shui 



Air Water 

zone zone 


























Brahma 


























Earth Fire 

zone zone 

DIAGRAM: A 9 x 9 VASTU BUILDING BLUEPRINT 


Determining the size and shape of the house is 
based on one’s Jyotish (Vedic astrology) birth chart. 


The Chinese version of natural-home living (i.e., 
harmony with nature) is called Feng Shui Cfung 
shway”). Its principles and goals are as universal 
and as natural as Ayurveda and Vcistu Shdstra. In 
fact, Feng Shui practitioners believe that this 
science was adapted from India’s Vdslu Shdstra. 

Much more information is currently available 
in the U.S. about Feng Shui. Further, there are many 
Feng Shui practitioners in the states and through 
the world. It is reported that in Hong Kong today, 
people will not work for a company if the building 
is not built or adjusted according to Feng Shui; so 
strong is their belief in the science. Even U.S. 
companies, such as Chase Manhattan Bank and 
Citibank, with branches in Hong Kong, Singapore, 
and Taiwan, reportedly had to build their offices 
according to these principles before local 
employees would agree to work in the buildings. 

In the U.S. as well, many companies use Feng 
Shui in their offices. Even television shows and 
newspaper cover this science (including Donald 
Trump’s use of Feng Shui). 

In addition to providing guidelines on building 
structures, Feng Shui also offers very practical and 
























































Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 27: Outer Healing 


inexpensive methods to correct architectural 
problems in a building without having to remodel 
or rebuild. Extensive knowledge of Feng Shui and 
the ability to remedy without expensive remodeling 
make Feng Shui a very appealing. [In the late 1990’s, 
information offered on Vasin Shdstra suggested very 
huge and expensive undertakings. This made Feng 
Shui more financially appealing. With the turn of 
the century, there are more Vdstu books and 
practitioners who offer minor and inexpensive home 
and business remedies, Vastu is becoming more 
widely used.] 

The basic premise of Feng Shui is that the 
structure (e.g., the home) has a life force of its own. 
This external life force or chi (pronounced chec) is 
the same as kundalinl. Although it is most important 
to have one’s inner kundalinl raised for Self- 
Realization, there is no harm (and it is helpful) to 
ensure that the outer kundalinl or chi also flows 
properly. To this end, a brief discussion of Feng 
Shui follows. 

Various schools of Feng Shui exist. One school 
works with a compass, using precise measurements 
and calculations. Other schools rely on some basic 
guidelines and then infuse intuition into the 
decision making process. Still other schools have 
more modern integrative interpretations. One 
popular school of thought will be discussed here. 
Its basic theory is simple and straight forward, and 
has become a very popular practice over the last 
decade. 

This intuitive form of Feng Shui was popularized 
by author Sarah Rossbach. She is a student of Lin 
Yun of the Tantric Black Hat branch of Tibetan 
Buddhism, who is credited with making this 
approach widely available in the West. 

Although it is always better to hire a trained 
practitioner of Feng Shui, many simple therapies 
can be done by reading Rossbach’s book, Interior 
Design with Feng Shui. The do-it-yourself 
approach to Feng Shui is simple and inexpensive. 

Simple remedies include rearrangement of 
desks, couches, chairs, and beds. Structural 
considerations, such as placement of stairs by the 
front door, hallways, angled ceilings, and ceiling 
beams require minor remedies. Three inexpensive 
methods to remedy structural problems in the home 


or office include mirrors, wind chimes, and small 
crystal balls. 

One use of mirrors will be explained to provide 
a basic understanding of the science. A structure 
(e.g., a home) is divided into nine equal rectangles 
(or squares) by applying a tic-tac-toe-like grid over 
a drawing of the building. Each rectangle relates to 
a specific area of one’s life (except for the center 
rectangle—similar to Vdstu). The placement of the 
front door determines the personality of each 
rectangle. 

Feng Shui Building Blueprint 

The front door is somewhere on this wall of the house. 


Wealth 

Fame 

Marriage/ 

Relationship 

Family/ 

Health 


Children 

Knowledge 

Career 

Helpful 

People 


The diagram above shows a floor plan of a 
building with nine equal rectangles. Eight of the 
areas relate to eight different aspect of life. In this 
drawing the front door is placed along the bottom 
of the chart. Thus, areas of knowledge, career, and 
helpful people will reside on the whichever wall 
holds the front door to the house (or door you mostly 
use). 

To enhance any of these areas, a mirror can be 
placed on the wall to symbolically reflect the positive 
flow of life force of that domain of life. Some 
companies sell inexpensive 3-inch hexagonal or 
octagonal mirrors with the names of each domain 
written on them both in English and Chines. 
However any attractive mirror will work fine. 

Here is an example how to use the mirrors. If a 
person has an unusual or severe health problem, a 
health mirror is placed on the wall in the family/ 
health area. It does not matter what room of the 










The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


house it is (e.g., bedroom, kitchen) The focus is on 
the area itself as the domain of health (in relationship 
to the front door). Thus, in addition to herbs, foods, 
and other Ayurvedic therapies for healing, the 
placement of the mirror will help harmonize any 
external causes related to health. 

Career mirrors are also used for healing certain 
health problems. Career troubles (such as job 
dissatisfaction, fearing loss of job) can lead to 
anxiety and worry. This mental tension can cause 
mental and/or physical health disorders. In addition 
to brain tonic herbs like brahmi, to calm the mind, a 
career mirror can be placed in this sector of the home 
to bring positive changes in one’s career. Thus, Feng 
Shui offers an additional healing therapy option. 

The layout of a building is also said to influence 
each area of life. As an example, the diagram below 
gives an example of a second-floor apartment. 



If the stairway rises up into the career area of the 
apartment, it will cut out a large section of the space. 
This can indicate trouble with career because that 
part of the apartment is missing. It is likely that the 
resident will have trouble keeping a job or finding a 
good job. Placing a career mirror on the wall in this 
area would help rectify this situation. 

Changes can occur in one of two ways. 
Sometimes the change is very noticeable, such as 
finding a job. In other cases, changes occur on the 
level of thinking. For example if a person had 


previously been resigned to the belief that they were 
stuck in their job and there was no way out; they 
may never have given a thought to changing jobs 
or careers. After placing a career mirror in the career 
area of their home, they may begin to consider job 
improvement. In other words, before a job change 
can occur, one must be ready for it; one should 
consider the topic or be aware of it. 

Positive change means leading one a step further 
from where one began when the mirror was placed. 
Some people may be ready for a job or healing to 
occur. Others may need further information before 
making such choices or and allowing such 
developments. 


¥■ 



Healing Structural Problems 

Sometimes the actual structure of the home, 
apartment or office blocks the proper flow life 
force. Through the use of simple and inexpensive 
therapies, such as mirrors and crystal balls, the flow 
of proper life force can be restored. Three examples 
are listed below. 

If the front door opens to face a wall, the life 
force is blocked. It is psychologically cramping or 
inhibiting to always feel one is walking into a wall 
and leads to a life of struggle. To resolve this a mirror 
is placed on the wall (see diagram A). 























Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 27: Outer Healing 



Another structural problem involves having a 
stairway facing the front door. This allows the life 
force and money to flow out the door. The remedy 
is to hang a crystal ball or wind chime between the 
bottom stair and the front door. This improves the 
life force. 

The entrance way or foyer should be well lit and 
spacious; dark spaces are psychologically 
depressing; narrow spaces evoke oppressive feelings 
that choke the home owner’s luck and health, 
leading to breathing problems. Placing a large mirror 
on the wall gives a sense of depth to the foyer. 

Stairways should be well lit and wide, with high 
ceilings. Hanging a mirror on the ceiling gives a 
sense of spaciousness and brightens the stairs, 
thereby preventing the feeling of constriction. 

Many other simple and inexpensive therapies 
are available for slanted ceilings, long corridors, 
aligned doors and windows, and more. 


the room not allow for proper bed placement, mirrors 
can be hung on the walls to reflect the door. 




Furniture Placement 

The arrangement of furniture can also enhance 
or hamper the life force. It is possible to set up living 
room and office chairs that empower everyone. 
Placement of the bed is crucial for health, 
strength, and mental peace. A person’s head should 
be able to see anyone entering through the bedroom 
door. If a person doesn’t see someone entering the 
room it may startle them. This shocks the life force, 
causing nervousness and anxiety. The best bed 
placement is to have the bed at an angle to the door. 
Other helpful placements are shown below. Should 



Feng Shui balances or harmonizes the outer life 


. fg "Sfc 



















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


force, enabling life to flow according to natural law. 
Thus, it follows the same principles as Ayurveda, it 
is considered a useful Ayurvedic therapy for 
external influences on health. 


Herbs and Their Effects 
A New Paradigm of Healing 

In the light of modern science, persons may 
wonder how such an ancient science compares with 
the technological advantages of today’s medicine. 
In fact, it is astonishing to see just how specific and 
comprehensive Ayurvedic insights are. 

In addition to understanding herbal application 
for doshas and specific disorders, it is interesting 
to know that herbs send their healing energy to 
specific organs. Pippall, for example, has an 
affinity for the liver. Guduchl has a predisposition 
for the blood tissue (rakta clhatn). Thus, herbs can 
target specific sites for precise therapy. 

Further, if a preliminary site is blocked along 
with a secondary site, an additional herb can be 
used to remove the primary block so that the second 
herb can travel to the latter site. For example, if 
the blood tissue needs repairing, but the blood cell 
receptors are unable to receive guduchl, kantkarl 
is first used to correct the blood cell receptors. In 
this way, guduchl will be received by the cells and 
will reach the blood tissue. This aspect of Ayurveda 
falls under pharmacokinetics (the study of 
absorption, distribution, metabolism, and 
excretion). 

Another branch of Ayurvedic knowledge is 
pharmacodynamics, or the study of the action and 
effect of herbs on doshas, dhatus, wastes (malas), 
and channels (srotas). 

Pharmacotherapeutics is the study of matching 
herbs to people. Specific conditions must be taken 
into consideration: the size of the dose, the age of 
the person, their level of strength and tolerance, 
mental condition, and digestive functioning. Other 
factors include the season, time of day, time of 
collection, method of herb storage, the potency of 
the herbs, the client’s diet, and whether the herbs 
are fresh or dry. One herb can have many different 


applications; seemingly unrelated disorders can be 
healed from the same herb. For example, kutkl can 
be used for heart disease, colic, painful urination, 
respiratory conditions, convulsions, and insomnia. 

Medicine should be considered to 
perform diverse functions. 

Charak Samhitci: Su. 4; verse 22 

This is very different from the modem idea that 
one drug can be used for one disease; although this 
idea is not entirely foreign to Western practitioners. 
Sometimes, when studying many patients who are 
taking a drug for one condition, it is found that the 
drug also helps another condition. The reverse of 
this finding is also true; various adverse side effects 
can unknowingly develop from taking a drug. Here, 
too, Ayurveda reveals the possible side effects of 
herbs (if any), so there are no surprises. The main 
principle of Ayurveda is to cause no harm. Armed 
with knowledge of uses and side effects, Ayurvedic 
practitioners can avoid such mistakes. 

A therapy that helps some symptoms but 
causes other symptoms is not a pure therapy. 

-Ashtanga Hridayam: Su. 12; verse 16 


Holistic Interrelation 

Western thinking seems to focus on pieces, 
remaining unaffected by the whole picture. For 
example, illness and unhealthy organs are viewed 
independently. Other symptoms, such as nutrition, 
life-style, and career, are too often not taken into 
account. Ayurveda, on the other hand, is founded 
on the principle that all aspects of one’s life are 
interrelated. The whole is greater than the sum of 
its parts. This is clearly seen in the way drugs are 
made, versus how herbs are prepared. Western 
medicine isolates active ingredients from known 
herbs to guarantee certain levels of active 
ingredients in their drugs, ignoring the possibility 
that our unknown active ingredients may also play 





Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 27: Outer Healing 


a part in the process; directing the ingredient to a 
specific site or preventing side effects. Some holistic 
practitioners have also fallen into this piecemeal 
frame of thinking. Ayurveda encourages persons 
to look at healing from the truly holistic vantage. 

Certain herbs perform unique actions and do not 
follow the general rules. For example, many herbs 
have been found helpful in reducing hypoglycemia 
(mostly bitter and astringent tastes). Yet, why these 
herbs perform this action cannot be explained 
phytochemically, or taxonomically. 

In other words, no one active ingredient can be 
said to effect healing. This example lends more 
credence to the idea that much can be lost through 
the extraction and use of only extracted parts of a 
plant. 

The aim of the herb’s action is the whole plant, 
thus, examine the whole patient 
Charak Samhita: Vi. 8; verse 94 

Healing the Unhealable 

Some diseases are considered incurable, and in 
some cases untreatable. These include psoriasis, 
certain liver disorders, obesity, malabsorption, 
rheumatoid arthritis, osteoarthritis, asthma, skin 
allergies, diabetes, epilepsy, MS, certain cancers, 
and some mental disorders, to name a few. Patients 
may be told by their doctors that not much can be 
done other than live with the condition. In some 
cases, drugs can lessen the symptoms, but healing 
is not available. 

Ayurveda has found that many of these 
conditions can be healed, so long as the conditions 
are not genetic in origin. Even when heredity is a 
factor, Ayurveda can at least contain, lessen, and 
sometimes remove the symptoms; however, 
persons may be required to remain on the herbal 
and nutritional therapies for the rest of their lives. 

These statements are not being made to discredit 
Western medicine; it has its place. The point here 
is that Ayurveda offers valid complimentary 
therapies that can help in many cases where 
Western medicine presently has no answers. 


Healing vs Curing 

It is useful to review the concept of curing versus 
healing. Western terminology centers on the notion 
of curing, as if one can achieve a permanent state of 
health. Ayurveda suggests that health does not 
necessarily mean the absence of disease or even the 
absence of symptoms. 

Rather, if one achieves a state of homeostasis 
or balance (i.e., a harmonious integration of all 
mental and physical systems), a person will feel 
healthy. The Ayurvedic view makes sense because 
we know there are such things as viruses and 
parasites within our system. When the immune 
system is weak these elements cannot take hold 
and cause disease. 

The mind and body continually undergo 
rhythmic changes as a result of age, season, time 
of day, and metabolism. Consequently, persons 
must adjust to these internal and external influences 
to maintain their balance. It does not make sense 
that once a medicine is taken and the symptoms 
are ‘cured’ that the body will no longer be 
challenged. 

An example of how rhythms affect the 
physiology is given in a study discussed in the 
Principles of Ayurvedic Therapeutics by A.V. 
Kumar. The chemicals acetylcholine, 
catecholamine, and histamine were more 
predominant in the blood of the subjects during 
summer, rainy, and winter seasons. Thus, these 
three chemicals, also related to Vayu, Pitta, and 
Kapha respectively, increase and decrease in the 
human body according to seasonal rhythms. This 
is why Ayurveda suggests subtle changes in diet 
and life-style according to the season. 


Working With Natural Rhythms 

Ayurveda also delineates the best time of year 
to collect herbs to ensure their maximum potency, 
and also the best time of day to take the herbs 
depending upon it’s properties. Below are two 
tables discussing these rhythmic schedules. 

Further, when collecting thick roots, only the 
root bark is collected. When roots are thin, the whole 
root is collected. 







The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


When To Take Herbs 


Plant Part 

Time to Collect 

rhizomes, 
roots, bark 

late autumn, early spring 

leaves 

at the time the flower 
develops and before the 
maturing of the fruits and 
seeds 

flowers 

just before pollination 

fruit 

when ripe 

seeds 

when fully matured 

juicy parts 

winter 

emetics and 
purgatives 

at the end of spring 


Herb Property 

Time To Take Herb 

gastric sedatives 

on an empty stomach 

stomachics, 
bitter tonics 

1/2 hour before bed 

emetics 

morning (to remove 
undigested food from the 
previous night) 

purgatives 

morning or evening 

diuretics 

daytime (when skin 
is kept cool) 

diaphoretics 

during fever 


Rejuvenation 


Other areas unique to Ayurveda include 
rejuvenation, longevity, or age reversal 
(rasdyanas). The concept of rasdyanas takes 
healing to another level. Beyond healing and 
prevention, Ayurveda says that through special 


herbs, diet, lifestyle, ethics, and spirituality, the mind 
and body can actually rebuild new healthy cells and 
tissues, thus slowing or reversing the aging process. 

Brain tonics like ashwagandha, shankhpushpl, 
and brahmi have been found to prevent senility and 
memory loss. Physically, the essential life sap in 
the body that protects the immune system can 
actually continue to develop through eating herbs 
like shatavarl and ashwagandha. 

Rejuvenation is new to Western medicine. 
Rejuvenation views the psychological, 
neurological, endocrinological, and immunological 
systems as an integrated whole. The key organ 
studied in rejuvenation is the brain. The brain 
influences its peripheral systems, the immune 
system, and harmonizes body functions. Through 
the use of special herbs, foods, and pancha karma 
practices, the chemical age of individuals can be 
reversed. 

Herbal Catalytic Agents (Anupanas) 

In addition to the advanced knowledge of herb 
usage, Ayurveda offers various herbs, liquids, and 
foods to empower the main herb, thereby healing 
even more quickly. For many conditions, mercury 
ash is suggested. Presently it is not allowed in some 
Western countries in this form because it is 
erroneously believed to be harmful. Mercuric 
oxide, however, is used for healing styes in the U.S. 
Although it is true that mercury in its natural state 
is toxic, it becomes a powerful healing agent after 
undergoing a specific burning process. Other 
catalysts include: 























Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 27: Outer Healing 


Disease 

Catalyst (Anupana) 

Acidity 

ghee and sugar 

Anemia 

butter and rock candy 

Anorexia 

ginger juice and honey 

Bronchitis 

honey, ghee 

Epilepsy 

buttermilk 

Facial Palsy 

honey 

Leukoderma 

castor oil 

Renal Calculus 

honey and hot water 

Rheumatism 

shilajit and gokshura 

Tumors 

castor oil, lemon juice 


Knowledge vs Experience 

In the West, knowledge is most highly revered. 
Experience and knowledge are equally important 
in the East, but experience is seen as the crucial 
validating factor. The essence of Ayurveda is to 
remove the obstacles to health on one’s spiritual path. 
Thus, the most important aspect of learning 
Ayurveda is to learn to follow one’s personal 
Ayurvedic regimen to achieve balance. 

Too often, in the name of helping others, 
compassionate healers will ignore their own health 
and lifestyle. Developing and maintaining balance 
deepens one’s intuition, compassion, ethics, and 
overall spiritual life; thereby ever improving one’s 
abilities as a healer. In contrast, many Westerners 
will absorb themselves in the intellectual study of 
a subject (even Ayurveda), forgetting to include 
themselves in the holistic picture. 

Parallels: East and West 

Although we have discussed at some length the 
unique aspects of Ayurveda, many parallels do 
remain between East and West. In fact, one can 
more readily accept the validity of the Ayurvedic 
system when the anatomical, physiological, and 


endocrine, systems discussed are found to be 
identical to those known through modem science. 

One such example is the discussion of srota : 
srotasmi, siras, rakta, and hridaya. Although these 
words may seem foreign, they are merely the 
Sanskrit words for channels, arteries and arterioles, 
capillaries, veins and venules. The blood flow 
process (from the heart through the arteries and 
arterioles, branching into the capillaries and 
supplying nutrients to the body) is identical in both 
Ayurvedic and modem medical descriptions. Thus, 
as the Ayurvedic system is examined more 
thoroughly, it will reveal many similarities to 
modern medicine. 


Ayurvedic Research 
Modern Scientific Validation 

This book has been dedicated to the compilation 
and presentation of Ayurveda, the holistic healing 
alternative from India. Throughout the chapters, 
modem terminology has been added to reveal the 
parallels between the ancient and modem sciences. 
These similarities suggest just how credible this 
ancient science is. Still, one may wonder whether 
Ayurveda would be applicable in today’s society, 
or in other cultures other than Indian. In short, can 
holistic healing alternatives (e.g., herbs, meditation, 
proper nutrition, yog a) offer solutions to diseases 
in our time? 

Over the past decade, many studies focused on 
just this question. This section offers a brief look 
into the extensive research being done on 
Ayurvedic herbs over the past 10 years. 
Summations of the research from books and 
journals, including studies listed for those who 
wish to take a more scientific approach, are given 
here. 

There are different forms of Ayurvedic research: 
studying of the effect of herbs on humans, on 
animals, and in vitro (isolated tissue cell or organ 
preparation). Another group of herbal research 
involves whole-plant versus isolated-active 
ingredients; and whole plant versus herbal extracts. 
In order to keep the integrity and spirit of 
Ayurvedic holistic healing, it is important to 

















The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


emphasize human research, whole plant research, 
and whole-plant extracts. Human studies do not 
inflict unnecessary cruelty on animals. Whole plant 
and whole-plant extracts. Human studies do not 
inflict unnecessary cruelty on animals. Whole plant 
and whole plant extracts offer the entire preparation 
made by mother nature. Anything less can 
potentially cause harm. 

First, these herbs have been safely and 
successfully used for thousands of years, and their 
effects are fully documented in Ayurvedic texts. 
To inflict illness, suffering and pain on animals 
just to study these results seems cruel and 
unnecessary. Further, effects on animals do not 
automatically assume the same results will be found 
in humans—it is a jump in logic. So research on 
animals is not advocated. 

Second, in trying to prove the efficacy of 
Ayurvedic herbs, some people try to make it fit 
into the western allopathic paradigm of drugs. In 
other words, find the active ingredient, isolate it, 
and boost its strength—if something is good, more 
of it must be better. It is this very process that has 
led to the harmfulness of drugs. Isolated ingredients 
—even from herbs—can cause side effects. 

Mother nature has added to each whole plant 
part not only active ingredients, but also protective 
ingredients. This is the value of holistic vision. 
These days pharmacies and health food stores are 
selling herbal products containing only active 
isolated ingredients. This is just what drugs are. 
This will be equally harmful. Further, making a 
man-made version of an herb, it is now enhanced 
by using only the extracted version—a more potent 
version of this isolated herb. Thus, if there is 
potential harm from the herb, the danger is not 
increased exponentially. 

In short, it is hoped that future researcher will 
consider keeping the integrity of Ayurveda in mind 
when they design their tests. It is further hoped 
that herbal and pharmaceutical companies will not 
try to mold the integrity and value of Ayurvedic 
medicine into the less effective and more dangerous 
mindset of allopathic drugs. In an April 15,1988 
JAMA article (pages 1200-1205), it was reported 
that death due to allopathic drugs was the fourth 
leading cause of death in the US for 1997. 


This is 21/2 times more deaths than from AIDS. 
If AIDS is an epidemic, what do we call death due 
to prescription drugs? One person figured out these 
deaths are equivalent to a plane crash a day. Why 
do we insist on molding herbal research to become 
like allopathic drug research? Simple double-blind 
studies on humans using whole plant herbs will be 
safe, effective, and still produce acceptable and 
reliable research. It is hoped that this information is 
heeded before herbs are used in a way that makes 
them as harmful as prescription drugs. 

Discussed below are some research studies. The 
Ayurvedic herbal section includes studies using 
various forms of research from human-whole plant, 
to animal-active ingredient extracts. This small 
sample of more than 2,000 Ayurvedic studies is 
presented to show the efficacy of Ayurvedic herbs; 
it is not meant to condone the various forms of 
research that have potentially harmful outcomes 
as discussed above. 

Another notion to keep in mind when 
maintaining the integrity of the Ayurvedic system 
is that Ayurveda uses herbs to heal the root-cause 
of illness, not merely treating the symptoms. Also, 
Ayurveda considers the whole person and their 
lifestyle. To ignore this would be to weaken the 
healing power of Ayurveda, as well as destroy its 
spiritual link. Therefore, for all the above reasons, 
researchers, herbal and pharmaceutical companies, 
doctors, and practitioners are respectfully urged 
to avoid attempting to fit Ayurveda into the mold 
of modern medicine. 


Research 

Modern research 
has begun to 
investigate the power 
of prayer and 
meditation, low-fat vegetarian diets, and hatha yoga 
exercises. The results of the research suggest that 
meditation or prayer, yoga, diet, and lifestyle 







Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 27: Outer Healing 


changes play an effective role in the healing and 
prevention process. Further, scientific studies are 
underway on various Ayurvedic herbs to determine 
if the suggestions of the Ayurvedic texts are valid 
for people of this era. Diseases presently be 
researched using Ayurvedic herbs include the heart, 
liver, cholesterol, asthma, osteoarthritis, and AIDS. 


Alternative Healing and Arteriosclerosis 

Dr. Dean Ornish, in his book, Reversing Heart 
Disease,, has discussed scientific studies he had 
conducted on reversing heart disease, specifically, 
coronary artery disease (CAD) or coronary 
arteriosclerosis. Because of his studies, many 
health insurance companies have begun to offer 
compensation 

for coronary heart patients who enroll in Dr. 
Ornish’s heart therapy program. 

In a 1-year, randomized, single-blind study, 28 
patients were placed in an experimental group. 
They were given a low-fat vegetarian diet and 
stopped smoking cigarettes and drinking coffee. 
They also began various “stress management” 
routines (i.e., exercises of hatha yoga stretching, 
prdnayama breathing, moderate walking, 
relaxation and visualizations, and group support 
sessions). Another group of 20 patients comprised 
the control group. This latter group followed the 
currently recommended 30% fat reduction diet. 
The experimental group improved significantly, 
whereas the control group actually grew worse. 
Specifically, in the experimental group there was 
a significant decrease in cholesterol. Other 
reductions include the frequency of angina, lesion 
size, and apoli poprote in B. The control group had 
increases in these areas. 

Stress management measures may have proved 
effective owing to their ability to reduce emotional 
stress that stimulates the sympathetic nervous 
system. This increased stimulation may lead to 
chemical reactions that cause coronary problems 
and blood clots. 

It may also be that a holistic healing approach 
(i.e., meditation, hatha yoga, breathing, diet, group 
support) is a more effective way to recover and 


prevent coronary heart disease. This is because 
holistic health considers persons as a whole, beyond 
an isolated physical organ. For example, all the 
patients in the experimental group had a common 
feeling of isolation or emotional loneliness. Thus, a 
correlation may exist between emotional (e.g., a 
breaking heart) and physical health. Group support 
sessions helped remove the barriers causing 
emotional isolation. 

Group support and the educationally motivating 
aspects of the holistic approach worked to inspire 
the experimental group to comply with the 
program. 


Prayer, Meditation, and Healing 

In Dr. Dossey’s book, Healing Words, he 
discusses various studies on the use of prayer and 
meditation by people to heal and prevent illness 
from occurring, or becoming worse. 

In a randomized, double-blind study by Dr. 
Randolph Byrd, an experimental group of 192 
coronary patients (versus 201 control coronary 
patients) arranged to have between 5 and 7 people 
praying for them daily over a 10-month period. 
No one prayed for the control group. The 
experimental group was five times less likely to 
require antibiotics and three times less likely to 
develop pulmonary edema. 

None of the experimental group needed 
artificial air tubes, whereas 12 people in the 
“unremembered” group had this need; and fewer 
people died in the experimental group (but this was 
not statistically significant). The study was widely 
respected, but inconclusive and requiring further 
research and a larger study group. 

In another study by Braud and Schlitz, 62 people 
(influencers) were asked to perform healing on 271 
subjects, whose health concerns ranged from overly 
emotional, hyperactivity, tension headaches, high 
blood pressure, and ulcers. The influencers were 
asked to perform mental imagery and self-calming 
techniques; depending upon the needs of the 
subjects. Influencers and subjects were subjects were 
located in different rooms in the same building (20 





The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


meters away). Thirteen experiments were 
performed. Results were strong, 
consistent, and replicable. 

Dossey also mentioned the Spindrift group, who 
for more than 10 years has performed laboratory 
experiments suggesting that prayer helps healing. 
Two types of prayer were measured: directed (goal- 
oriented or image, i.e., praying for cancer to be 
cured) and non-directed (whatever is best for the 
patient, or ‘let God’s will be done’). 

They found that both methods work, but the non- 
directed approach was determined to be more 
powerful. These findings suggest that a person need 
not know how the healing process occurs, but pray 
for healing to occur, however it is best for the 
patient. 

Dr. Dossey cites a study by Dr. Daniel Benor 
who investigated 131 studies on spiritual healing 
done before 1990 (mostly nonhuman studies). In 
56 of the studies, the positive findings were said to 
be 1 in 100 to result from chance. In another 56 
studies, between 2 and 5 in 100 were said to result 
from chance. 

Benor found in 151 out of 194 fungus cultures 
that growth was inhibited or retarded after 15 
minutes of concentration. This took place from 
about 1.5 yards distance away from the fungus. 
This study was replicated when distances increased 
to 15 miles away from the fungus cultures. Results 
were replicated in 16 experiments. 

Another study found people with no known 
healing abilities to retard and stimulate significant 
bacterial culture. Other studies demonstrated the 
ability to inhibit cancer cells in simple organisms 
(e.g., one-celled algae, paramecia, and moth 
larvae), plants, and animals. 

In light of this research, the relevance and 
effectiveness of Ayurvedic therapies of meditation, 
nutrition, hatha yoga, pranayama in healing and 
preventing modern-day illness is most 
encouraging. It suggests that medical technological 
developments do not imply a more advanced 
culture in terms of healing. Rather, it suggests that 
the ancient healers were as adept (or more so) in 
healing and preventing illness. This wisdom was 
lost or overlooked for some time. 


In the coming decade, much scientific research 
should validate the use and need for a more spiritual 
and holistic approach to true healing. It is more 
than likely that Ayurvedic wisdom will play a 
significant role in this regard. 

Ayurveda, Allopathy, and Health Care 

As discussed earlier, not only might alternative, 
natural, Ayurvedic care be a useful complement to 
Western medicine in terms of healing, but it can also 
be financially practical. In a recent Yoga Journal 
article about Dr. Ornish’s “reversing heart disease” 
program, the difference in cost between traditional 
heart care and a holistic approach, such as Dr. 
Ornish’s, was staggering. Heart bypass operations 
cost about $43,000, and the process of opening the 
arteries through surgery (angioplasty) costs around 
$18,000. Cholesterol lowering medicine alone, such 
as Lovastatin, can cost up to $1,500 a year per 
person. 

When compared with the $3,500 cost of 
Ornish’s 12-week program, it is enough to make 
any hospital administrator think twice, and in fact, 
it has. David M. Liff, the Program Development 
Consultant for Dean Ornish’s program said that 
they are inundated with requests from clinics 
around the United States to set up the heart disease 
reversal programs. It is interesting to note that the 
main Ayurvedic herb for cholesterol, guggul, may 
only cost $150 for an entire year; making this the 
most cost-effective cholesterol program. 

As more favorable research emerges on holistic 
healing alternatives for modern diseases, hospital 
administrators will want to expand their alternative 
healing programs to include other diseases as well. 


Ayurvedic Research 

In the Garden of Life, by Naveen Patnaik, several 
studies on Ayurvedic herbs are discussed. 

Brahmi (gotu kola) was used in a double-blind 
clinical test on 30 mentally retarded children (free 
from epilepsy and other neurological conditions). 






Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 27: Outer Healing 


The study attempted to see if there was an effect on 
their mental abilities. The results suggested that there 
was a significant improvement in both general 
mental ability and behavioral patterns after only 12 
weeks. 

Punarnava (hogweed) was found to be an effective 
therapy for nephritic syndrome (kidney) in 22 
patients, producing an increased flow of urine, 
reducing edema, and in an overall improvement of 
albumin urea, serum protein rise, and decreases in 
serum cholesterol levels. 

Guggul (Indian bedellium) was used in preliminary 
tests on 22 patients having hypercholesterolemia, 
associated with obesity, ischemic heart disease, 
hypertension, and diabetes. In all cases, the total 
serum cholesterol and serum lipid phosphorus 
levels diminished. A significant decrease in weight 
was found in 10 of the patients. In later studies 
involving 12 cases, guggul was found to reduce 
serum turbidity and prolong coagulation in all 
instances. 


Other Ayurvedic Research 

Brcihml (gotu kola; Centella asiatica or hydrocotyle 
asiatica). This herb was found to be useful for 
cirrhosis of the liver, periodontal disease, peripheral 
vascular disease, scleroderma, vascular fragility, 
enhanced wound healing, enhanced connective 
tissue structure of the vascular sheath, and reduced 
sclerosis or hardening. It was found to reduce 
feelings of heaviness in the lower legs, numbness, 
nighttime cramps, swellings, spider veins and s ki n 
ulcers, vein distensibility, and improve blood flow 
through affected limbs in 80% of patients in clinical 
trials. 

Brcihml has been found to relieve depression, 
anxiety, mental fatigue, and enhance memory. 
[Journal of Research in Ayurveda and Saddai: 
1980] It has also been helping mentally 
handicapped and emotionally disturbed children. 
[Indian Journal of Psychiatry: 1977] 

It has been found helpful in treating cirrhosis. 
[Sem. Hop. Paris 55(37-8): 1749-50,1979] Brahml 


has been reported to heal brain tumors as well. 
[Herbal Gram No. 36] 

Harltakl (Terminalia chebula), Kesharaja (Eclipta 
alba), Tulsl (Ocimum sanctum) were found to be 
useful antibacterial herbs. Harltakl was the 
strongest and had the widest spectrum of 
antibacterial activity. Kesharaja had the second 
widest spectrum of effect. Additionally, salmonella 
was treated by harltakl. Shigella was treated by 
harltakl and kesharaja. [Indian Journal of Medical 
Sciences. 43 (5): 113-7, 1988 May] 

Amalakl (Emblica officinalis, Gaertn.) was studied 
in normal and hypercholesterololemic men. The 
herb was taken for 28 days. Both normal and 
hypercholesterolemic subjects showed a decrease 
in cholesterol levels. Two weeks after stopping the 
therapy, the total serum cholesterol levels of the 
hypercholesterolemic subjects rose significantly, 
almost to initial levels. [European Journal of 
Clinical Nutrition. 42 (11): 939-44, 1988 Nov.] 

Neem (Azadirachta indica ADR) and Turmeric 

(Curcuma longa) were tested to heal chronic ulcers 
(external) and scabies. They were used as a paste 
in 814 persons. 97% of the people were cured 
within 3-15 days. There were no toxic or adverse 
reactions. [Tropical and Geographical Medicine 44 
(1-2): 178-81, 1992 Jan.] 

Shatdvari (Asparagus racemosus) was used to test 
dyspepsia and as a galactogogue. It was compared 
with a modem drug (metoclopramide) which is 
used in dyspepsia to reduce gastric emptying time. 
The gastric emptying half-time was studied in 8 
healthy males. Shatdvari was found to work as 
effectively as the allopathic drug. [Postgraduate 
Medicine 36(2): 91-4, 1990 April] 

Ashwagcmclhd (Withania somnifera, stem of Shallaki 
(Boswellia serrata, rhizomes of Turmeric (Curcuma 
longa) and a zinc complex (Articulin-F) were 
studied in a randomized, double-blind, placebo- 
controlled, crossover study in persons with 
osteoarthritis. First, a 1-month single blind study 
on 42 persons with osteoarthritis was conducted. 
Persons were randomly allocated to receive either 














The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


the herbs or a placebo for a period of 3 months. 
After a 15-day “wash out” period, the two groups 
switched therapies for another 3 months. 
Evaluations were given every 14 days based on pain 
severity, morning stiffness, Ritchie articular index, 
joint score, disability score, and grip strength. 
Erythrocyte (red blood cell) sedimentation rate was 
monitored and radiological examinations were 
compared. The herbs were found to cause a 
significant drop in the severity of pain (P = .001) 
and a disability score (P = .05). No significant 
changes were noted in either group from the 
radiological assessment. [Journal of 
Ethnopharmacology. 33 (1-2) 91-5, 1991 May- 
June] 

In another study, the adaptogenic mechanism 
of ashwagandha was compared to ginseng. A 40- 
day double-blind study found ashwagandha equal 
or better than ginseng in the areas of improved 
problem solving, physical performance, and 
reaction time in healthy volunteers. [Indian 
Medicine: 3 (2,3): 1-5, 1991 April-July] 

The effects of ashwagandha were again 
measured in a double-blind study on 101 healthy 
persons, aged 50 to 59 years old. After taking 
ashwagandha for 1 year the volunteers showed 
significantly reduced signs of aging compared with 
the placebo group. Anti-aging was found in areas 
of increased melanin (hair pigment that declines 
with age that is responsible for graying) and 
significantly lower levels of calcium loss 
(measured in the nails) than the control group. 
[Journal of Research in Ayurveda and Saddai: 
247-258, 1980 - Kuppurajan, K., et al.] 

Ashwagandha has also been found to relieve a 
reactive form of depression. [Journal of Research 
in Ayurveda and Saddai, 1989] 

Guduchl (Tinospora cordifolia) was tested for its 
immunosuppression activity associated with 
deranged hepatic function and sepsis resulting from 
poor surgical outcomes. Preliminary studies 
suggested guduchl contains hepatoprotective and 
immunomodulatory properties in surgical 
outcomes in patients with malignant obstructive 
jaundice. This follow-up study tested 30 patients, 
randomly divided into two groups (matched with 


respect to clinical features, impairment of hepatic 
function, as judged by liver function testes including 
antipyrine elimination, and immunosuppression/ 
phagocytic capacities of neutrophils). The first group 
received conventional treatment, namely, vitamin K, 
antibiotics, and biliary drainage. Group two also 
received guduchl (16 mg/kg/day orally) during their 
biliary drainage. Hepatic function was comparable 
in the two groups after drainage, but the phagocytic 
and killing capacities of neutrophils were 
normalized only in persons receiving guduchl. 
Clinical evidence of septicemia was observed in 
50% of patients in group one, whereas none was 
found in the second group {P = .05). Postoperative 
survival in groups one and two were 40% and 
92.4%, respectively (P = .01). The conclusion 
drawn was that guduchl appears to improve surgical 
outcomes by strengthening host defenses. [Indian 
Journal of Gastroenterology. 12(1) :5-8,1993 Jan.] 

Turmeric (Curcuma longa) has been found to be a 
strong antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, antiviral, 
antibacterial, antifungal, anticancer, and a 
detoxifying herb. [Planta Med., 57: 1-7, 1991] 
Other research has found that turmeric’s active 
ingredient, circuminoids, have significant 
antioxidant activities in both prevention and 
intervention. [Nutracon 95; Majeed, M., and 
Badmaev, V.]. It was also found useful for the 
treatment of rheumatoid arthritis minus side effects. 
[Ind. J Med Res 71:632-4, 1980)] 

Triphald (Amalakl (Emblica Offic.), Harltakl 
(Terminalia chebula), Bibhltakl (Terminalia 
bellerica) have been found to improve digestion, 
absorb nutrients, and assist the body’s metabolism. 
It is also useful for psychosomatic conditions that 
affect the gastrointestinal tract. [Journal of 
Ethnopharmacology, 1990] 









Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 27: Outer Healing 


Bhuamalakl (Phyllanthus amarus) was tested in 
persons with chronic active hepatitis resulting from 
the chronic hepatitis B virus. In a 30-day study, a 
significant number of persons using bhuamalakl 
were rid of the viral antigen compared with the 
placebo group. [Lancet, 1988] 

Arjuna (Terminalia arjuna), Bibhltakl, and Harltakl 
help protect the heart muscle. [Indian Drugs: 1990] 

Pippall (Piper longum), alone or in trikatu, has been 
found to relieve asthma and chronic bronchitis. One 
study measured 240 children of various ages who 
frequently had bronchial asthma. Pippall was found 
to reduce the frequency and severity of attacks. 
[Indian Drugs: 1984] 

Bald (Sida cordifolia) has also been found to 
effectively relieve bronchitis and asthma. [Lancet: 
1984] 

Guggul (Gugulipid- Commiphora mukul), was 
found useful in healing acne vulgaris [Indian 
Journal of Dermatology Leprol 56(1):381-3,1990] 
and atherosclerosis (cholesterol reduction). HDL 
cholesterol gradually increased, whereas VLDL 
and LDL cholesterol significantly decreased [J 
Assoc Phys India 37(5):323- 8,1989; Indian J Med 
Res 87:356-60, 1988] 

The active components of gugulipid are Z- 
guggulesterone and E-guggulesterone. This active 
ingredient has been found to prevent Pitta- (heat) 
related side effects, caused by using the pure, whole 
resin. If Pitta conditions develop, it is useful to 
research kaishore guggul —Pitta-reducing guggul. 
In this way, the benefits of avoiding side effects as 
well as using the whole resin may be 
simultaneously accomplished. 

Licorice (Glycyrrhiza glabra), has been found to 
be effective in healing eczema [Br. J Clin. Pract. 
12:269-79, 1958], peptic ulcer [Hepato- 
gastroenterol 32(6):293-5, 1985], duodenal and 
gastric ulcer [Scand J Gasterenterol suppl. 65: 85- 
91, 1980], and dental plaque [Isr J Dent Sci 2(3): 
153-7, 1989], 


Licorice may cause some side effects when taken 
alone for more than 6 weeks. It may increase so¬ 
dium and water retention, hypertension, hypokale¬ 
mia, and suppress the reninaldosterone system. 
Monitoring blood pressure and electrolytes and in¬ 
creasing potassium intake is suggested. However,in 
Ayurveda these side effects can be avoided by mix¬ 
ing licorice in warm milk or using the de- 
glycyrrhized form.To date,we have not found any 
studies measuring these methods. 

Cranberry (Vaccinium macrocarpon)- Drinking 
cranberry juice has been found to effectively treat 
urinary tract infections [JAMA 271:751-4, 1994; 
J. Naturopathic Med 2(l):45-7, 1991; Southwest 
Med. 47(1): 17-20, 1966; Wisconsin Med. J. 
61:282, 1962] 

It has also been found helpful in kidney stone 
conditions, reducing the amount of ionized calcium 
in the urine [Urology l(l):67-70, 1973] 

Ishabgol (Plantago ovata) was found to help irri¬ 
table bowel syndrome—diarrhea: [Acta 
Gastroenterol Latinoam 17(4):317-23, 1987; Ir 
Med J 76(5):253, 1983]. It has also been helpful 
for constipation. [Gut 28(11):1510-13, 1987] 

Ishabgol was found to be useful for treatment 
of anal fissure (except in cases of advanced anal 
stenosis). [Dis. Colon Rectum, 21: 8, 1978 Nov- 
Dec, 582-3] 

When mixed with food, Ishabgol was found to 
reduce blood glucose responses. [J Am Coll Nutr, 
10: 4, 1991 Aug, 364-71] 

Ginger (Zingiber officinale) has been found to re¬ 
duce gastrointestinal complaints, atherosclerosis, 
headache, nausea, vomiting, and vertigo (numer¬ 
ous studies, including [Anaesthesia 45(8):669-71, 
1990; Acta Otolaryngol 105(1- 2):45-9,1988], os¬ 
teoarthritis [Med Hypothesis 39:342-8, 1992], 
rheumatic pain, and rheumatoid arthritis [Med 
Hypothesis 39:342-8, 1992; Med 577 Hypothesis 
29:25-8, 1989; ORL J Otorhinolaryngol Relat 
Spec, 48: 5,1986,282-6]. It was also found to con¬ 
tain high levels of anti-oxidants. [Chung Kuo 














The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Chung Yao Tsa Chih, 17: 6, 1997 Jun, 36809, 373 
backcover] 

Garcinia Spp . (Malabar Tamarind) may help 
reduce obesity. The dried fruit contains 20-30% of 
the active ingredient (-)Hydroxycitric acid 
(HCA). [Arch Biochem Biophys 135:209-17, 
1969; J Biol Chem 245:599, 1970]. HCA has 
been found to divert glucose from being used as 
building blocks of fatty tissue and increase the 
body’s supply of stored glucose, called glyco¬ 
gen. Glycogen also turns off food cravings. 

[Alt. Comp. Ther. 1(4) 

212-215, 1995]. In another study, insulin require¬ 
ments for persons with diabetes mellitis decreased 
along with fasting blood glucose and glycosylated 
hemoglobin (HbAlc), and glycosylated plasma 
protein levels. Serum lipids returned to near nor¬ 
mal levels with GS water soluble extract, 
glycosylated hemoglobin, and glycosylated plasma 
protein levels remained higher than control group. 
Enhances indigenous insulin. [J Ethnopharmacol, 
30: 3, 1990 Oct, 281-94] 

Gurmar (Gymnema sylvestre) was found to re¬ 
move sweetness from bittersweet mixtures, in¬ 
creasing bitterness. [J Comp Physiol Psychol, 93: 
3, 1979 June, 538-47]. In another study gurmar 
reduced sweet cravings. [Physiol Behav, 30: 1, 
1983 Jan, 1-9] 


Research by Disease 

In the book. Botanical Influences on Illness by 
Werbach and Murray, research is cited on foods 
and herbs that help various disorders. Some of the 
following were described earlier in this book. 

Atherosclerosis : (including coronary heart disease) 
Foods and herbs found to help these conditions (in 
scientific research) include alfalfa, artichoke, egg¬ 
plant, berberine (from barberry), curcumin (from 
turmeric), fenugreek, garlic, onion, ginger, 
gugulipid, and garcinia camboga (Malabar Tama¬ 
rind). 


Bronchial Asthma : Numerous studies have found 
herbs that help ease this condition including, aloe 
vera, coleus forskohlii (containing forskolin), lico¬ 
rice, onion, picrorrhiza kurroa ( katuka ) 

Cancer : Research has found many useful herbs for 
healing cancer, including barberry root (berberine), 
garlic, onions, and turmeric. 

Diabetes : Herbs and foods found to be helpful in 
diabetes include aloe vera, bitter melon 
(momordica charantia/AYra/a), fenugreek 
(Trigonella foenum graecum/methi), Gurmar, 
(gymnema sylvestr dSharkunikha) 

Psoriasis : Two herbs found useful in treating this 
condition are Bdkuchl (psoralea corylifolia) 
[Pharmac Ther 34:75-97, 1987] and sarsaparilla 
(Smilax sarsaparilla) [Br J dermatol 108:33-7, 
1983; N Engl J Med 227:128-33, 1942], Bdkuchl 
has also been found effective in treating vitiligo 
[Pharmac Ther 34:75-97, 1987], 

Collaborative Research 

Several cooperative studies between Zandu Phar¬ 
maceutical Works, Bombay India and various re¬ 
search institutions are discussed below. The herbs 
contained in the following formulas are readily 
available from many sources. This author is grate¬ 
ful for Zandu for making these studies available. 

Diabetes : One formula that includes gurmar, neem, 
and Shildjit was tested on 20 persons with proven 
maturity onset of diabetes over an 8-week period. 
Eighteen persons had hereditary histories of dia¬ 
betes. Ten people were randomly chosen as a con¬ 
trol group. Both groups followed certain dietary 
restrictions. 

All 10 people taking the herbal formula reported 
subjective, as well as objective improvement of all 
symptoms (polyphagia, polyuria, polydypsia, ex¬ 
cessive sweating, dryness of throat, numbness, fa¬ 
tigue, weakness, and constipation). Objective and 
subjective symptoms of the control group remained 

the same or increased. 


















Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 27: Outer Healing 


The group taking the herbal product) experienced 
decreased mean blood sugar values, dropping from 
204.1 mg/dL before the study to 119.65 mg/dL at 
the end of the study. The mean blood sugar levels 
in the control group rose from 189 mg/dL before 
the study to 205 mg/dL at the end of the study. 

Effects of a Herbomineral Compound on Dia¬ 
betes by K. N. C. Pal. Ayurved Samachar: Issue 8; 
vol 10 2 Feb. 1988 


Indigestion : A group of 20 general practitioners 
tested a digestive herbal in their private practices 
for 15 days on patients with anorexia, nausea, vom¬ 
iting, heaviness in the chest, heaviness in the body, 
burning sensation, and constipation. Patients were 
clinically assessed after the 4th, 7th, 11th, and 15th 
days of treatment. The herbal product included 
cumin, asafoetida, cinnamon, cardamom, ginger, 
pippali, coriander ( dhanyaka ), musta, and triphald. 

Significant improvement (p< 0.001) was seen 
in all clinical symptoms and signs. 

Effects of Ayurvedic Drug (AB + R) in Indi¬ 
gestion. Thakur, M. Bhatt, N.S. Mishra S. et. al. 
Medicine & Surgery. May - August '96/23 

Schizophrenia : A herbal product including 
Shankapushpl, brahml, ashwagandha, yashtl 
madhu, vachd, and sarpagandha was administered 
to 17 schizophrenia patients taking medication and 
22 patients not taking any medication for six weeks. 
Approximately 50% of both groups showed more 
than 50% improvement on the Brief Psychiatric 
Rating Scale. The herbs were relatively free from 
side effects. 

Evaluation of Indigenous Psychotoropic Drugs 
- A Preliminary Study. Parikh, M.D., Pradhan, P.V., 
Shah, L.P., Bagadia, V.N. Journ. Res. Ay. Sid. Vol 
5; no. 1-4 pp. 12-17 

Urinary Tract Infections : A total of 51 inpatients 
and outpatients with various urinary tract symp¬ 
toms (pain, burning, fever, frequency, blood in 
urine) was tested for 45 days using an herbal prod¬ 
uct that included guduchi, haridra, bilwa, and 
karela (bitter melon). Patients were monitored ev¬ 
ery 15 days. 


After 15 days, 50% of the patients began to show 
reduction of symptoms. At the end of 30 days more 
than 75% of the patients were symptom-free. By 
the end of the study only 3 patients (6%) had pain¬ 
ful or burning urination. Since modem antibiotic 
therapy cannot always guarantee long-term ben¬ 
efits, these herbs offer encouraging options to heal¬ 
ing urinary tract infections. Further, these herbs 
did not cause any side effects, even after 2 months 
of use. 

Clinical Trial of Ayurvedic Drug U-144 (K-4 
Tablets) in Urinary Tract Infections. Deshpande, 
P.J., Singh Raman, Bhatt, N.S. The Medicine & 
Surgery. Vol. 32; no. 10/11. Oct. - Nov. 1944 

Liver/Bile Disorders : Forty-five persons who de¬ 
veloped liver- and bile-related disorders following 
surgery were given an herbal product containing 
punarnavd, bhrihgardj, chirdyatd, arogyavardhini, 
and mandur bhasma (iron ash) for 45 days. Seven 
patients had cholecystectomy, 21 previous gall 
bladder operations, 12 hepatitis, and 5 T-tube bil¬ 
iary drainage following cholecyst-ectomy. Subjects 
were monitored every 15 days. 

Measurements after herbal therapy revealed 
increased liver function and control of hepatitis. 
Biliary flow was restored. Associated symptoms 
of nausea, dyspepsia, pain, tenderness, vomiting, 
belching, anorexia, vertigo, fever, swelling, con¬ 
stipation, weakness, and flatulence were alleviated 
in all subjects except for 1 symptom of jaundice 
and 3 signs of weakness. Four of the five biliary T- 
tube drainage cases showed definite increase in the 
biliary flow. 

Clinical Effect of an Ayurvedic Drug L 2002 on 
Hepatobiliary Disorders. Deshpande, P.J., Singh, 
R., Bhatt, N.S. Journal of NIMA, December 1994. 

More studies are available in the Ayurveda Primer 
(E-Book), and online at http://ayurvedahc.com 










The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Music Research 

The India Currents Magazine reports of scien¬ 
tific research involving music to heal heart disease 
and high blood pressure. Researchers in Berlin 
played music by Ravi Shankar, Strauss, and mod¬ 
ernist H. W. Henze for 40 heart patients. Blood 
samples and stress levels of patients were measured 
before and after listening to the music. 

The results were reported at the European Soci¬ 
ety of Cardiology in Amsterdam. Strauss’ music 
lowered stress hormones in the patients. However, 
levels were even lower after listening to the sitar 
music of Ravi Shankar. Blood pressure also reduced 
after listening to his music. By contrast, the modern 
music raised stress levels. 


Pancha Karma Research 

Rheumatoid arthritis : During the 1970s at 
Benares Hindu University, pin da sveda was found 
to relieve pain, swelling, stiffness, and swollen 
joints caused by rheumatoid arthritis within 1 week 
of treatment. Patients’ body weight (formally un¬ 
derweight) was also increased to healthier levels. 
Measurements involved ease of walking, gripping, 
and pressing power with both hands and body 
weight. 

Chronic rheumatoid arthritis and bronchial 

asthma : Two groups of patients were administered 
vamana and virechana, followed by samsarjana 
diet. One group suffered from chronic rheumatoid 
arthritis. The other group had bronchial asthma. 

Both groups of patients received 3 days of 
snehapdna (ingesting oil or ghee), whole body 
sveda for the next 3 days, vamana, and virechana, 
followed by the samsarjana diet. Within one week, 
post therapy measurements of physical, physiologi¬ 
cal, and biochemical parameters of the patients 
were taken. 

All rheumatoid arthritis patients showed statis¬ 
tically significant improvements in ease of walk¬ 
ing, and gripping power and pressing power (in 
both hands) (P < 0.05). Asthmatic patients showed 
a statistically significant increase in vital capacity 
and length of time to hold the breath (P < 0.05). 
Biochemically, a statistically significant reduction 


in D-xylose (P < 0.001) caused improved gas¬ 
trointestinal absorption capacity. 


Current NCCAM-NIH Studies 

The National Center for Complimentary and 
Alternative Medicine (NCCAM) is a part of the 
National Institutes of Health has funded several 
currently ongoing Ayurveda and yoga studies. Top¬ 
ics include Parkinsonism, general promotion of 
health, and yoga therapy for heroin addiction. 

They have a complete website covering research, 
newsletter, and more, visit their website: http:// 
nccam.nih.gov/ . Information may also be obtained 
by writing or calling the NCCAM Clearinghouse; 
PO. Box 7923; Gaithersburg, Maryland 20898 Toll 
Free: 888-644-6226. International: 301-519-3153 
FAX: 1-866-464-3616 (Toll-Free). Email: 
info @ nccam.nih. gov . 


Ayurveda at Columbia University 

In November 1994, the Dharma Hinduja Indie 
Research Center held its first 2-day conference in 
New York at Columbia University. It was entitled 
Health, Science and the Spirit: Veda and Ayurveda 
in the Western World. Ayurvedic Doctors from In¬ 
dia and the U.S. met and spoke with Western allo¬ 
pathic doctors, professors, and students from uni¬ 
versities across the country including Harvard, 
Columbia, New York University. 

One aim of the conference was to have Ayurvedic 
and allopathic medical professionals work together 
to develop valid scientific research on healing 
through Ayurvedic herbs and pancha karma. The 
scientific validation of the ancient Ayurvedic prac¬ 
tices is slowly developing. They may be contacted 
at 212-854-5300. Email: dhirc@columbia.edu. 


















Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 27: Outer Healing 


Modern-Day Challenges 
for Future Generations 

One reason Ayurveda is so effective is that it is 
a living science; it addresses new diseases and pro¬ 
vides appropriate therapies continually. The use of 
mercury as a powerful rejuvenative was introduced 
in the 14 th century. Minerals were first used in 
Ayurveda in the 16 th century. To accommodate new 
developments and discoveries, Ayurveda also adapts 
and adjusts. 

In the early 20 th century, the effects of the in¬ 
dustrial revolution, such as water and air pollution 
had a significant impact on the health of the wild¬ 
life, nature, and humans—including infants and 
fetuses. In time, a growing body of research would 
show that the development and use of chemicals 
(e.g., those used for pesticides and plastics) and 
drugs had also added to the poisoning of the planet 
and its creatures. It’s results manifested as a sharp 
increase in the incidence of cancer, asthma, neu¬ 
rological and immune disorders, and physical de¬ 
formities in children. Research suggests that there 
is a link between chemicals, environmental pol¬ 
lutants, and certain diseases. Today depletion of 
soil nutrients and erosion of soil, air and water 
pollution due to unnatural farming methods and 
deforestation continues. 

Modern Ayurveda must address these trends 
and their consequences. Although Ayurveda can 
address the symptoms, such as using herbs to re¬ 
move toxins from the body, the scope of healing 
must be expanded to address issues that currently 
are being overlooked, such as the poor nutrient 
quality of food, air, and water. Today, disease pre¬ 
vention includes eating organic foods to avoid 
harmful preservatives and insecticides. 

In the book, Our Stolen Future, the authors sug¬ 
gested that the use of man-made products has con¬ 
tributed to the ill health of wildlife and humans. 
Detergents, drugs (i.e., synthetic estrogen), indus¬ 
trial chemical waste, agricultural pesticides and 
runoff, pesticides, and cooking vessels and con¬ 
tainers made of plastics or other unnatural prod¬ 
ucts may also be poisoning our children, unbal¬ 
ancing their hormones, and interfering on the 
genetic and neuronal levels. 


Therefore, the substances that contaminate our 
food bear examination. The authors report that dam¬ 
age from these hormone-disrupting chemicals is most 
clearly seen in the offspring of women exposed to 
the pollutants during the first months of pregnancy. 

Ayurvedic Healing of Environmental Toxins 

If we address the three areas of the body that are 
most critically affected by environmental pollut¬ 
ants—the brain and the reproductive and immune 
systems-we can apply Ayurvedic therapies dis¬ 
cussed earlier. The following therapies are listed 
according to condition—not according to one’s 
dosha. Therefore, dosha must also be considered 
before choosing these suggestions. 

Herbs 

Hormonal/Reproductive : Ashwagandha, yam 
( varahlkand ), Shatdvarl and yogaraj guggul 

Liver detox : Bhuamalaki (main herb), kutki (for 
chemical and biological poisoning), barberry, 
chirayata , triphald , mahasudarshan, neem , musta 
and mahjishthd. 

Toning : Amalakl, bdkuchi and bhrihgaraj 
Massage 

Hormones : Releases growth hormones; massage 
(especially between eyebrows, neck and top of 
head; just below navel [basti], reproductive organ 
area [ guda ]) 

Liver : Elbow and knee joints, throat, heart and 
navel 

Foods 

Hormones : Organic foods (has no hormones 
added)-B6 vitamin (found in buckwheat, beans, 
carrots, brown rice); tofu (female hormones); thy¬ 
roid: sea vegetables, watercress oats, green foods 
such as wheatgrass juice or powder. 

Liver : Organic foods-cherries, figs, grapes, melons, 
papayas, pears, pineapples, raspberries, artichokes, 
beets, bitter melon, avocado, beans. Bmssels sprouts, 


& A 












The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


mung sprouts, celery, watercress, barley, com, mung 
beans, and ghee. Fenugreek, B2 vitamin (found in 
millet, soy, whole wheat, wheat germ, beans, milk, 
nuts, dark greens, molasses), green foods such as 
wheatgrass juice or powder. 

Yoga Poses 

Hormones : Siddhayogasana/siddha yoni asana, 
cow pose, any of the spinal twist poses, shoulder 
stand, fish pose and tortoise 

Liver : Siddhayogasana/siddha yoni asana, lotus 
pose, any bow pose, spinal twist, tortoise and fish 

Breathing Exercises (pranayama) 

Hormones : Shitkari kumbhaka (hissing breath ex¬ 
ercise) and solar pranayama 
Liver : Shitkari kumbhaka, frontal brain cleanse 

Bandhas & Madras 

Jalandhara bandha (throat lock), mula bandha, 
maha bheda mudra 

Miscellaneous 

Purgation for liver cleansing. Aromatherapy—iris 
and gardenia for the liver. 


Ayurveda and 

Environmental Food Considerations 

Why buy Organic? 

Organic foods are preferred for two reasons: 
personal and environmental health. In both cases, 
the concern is not so much for adults, but for chil¬ 
dren and parents who plan to have children—the 
concern is for future generations of people and the 
future of the planet. 

The Organic Trade Association offers the follow¬ 
ing reasons one should buy organic foods: 

1. Organic products meet stringent standards. 

2. Organic certification is the public’s assurance 
that products have been grown and handled accord¬ 


ing to strict procedures without persistent toxic 
chemicals. 

3. Organic food has more flavor. 

4. Well-balanced soils nourish strong healthy plants. 
Many chefs use organic foods in their recipes be¬ 
cause they taste better. 

5. Organic production reduces health risks. 

6. Many Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)- 
approved pesticides were registered long before 
extensive research linked these chemicals to cancer 
and other diseases. Organic agriculture does not 
release additional chemicals into the air, earth, and 
water. 

7. Organic farms protect water resources. 

8. Eliminating polluting chemicals and nitrogen 
leaching in combination with soil building protects 
and conserves water resources. Water makes up 
two-thirds of our body mass and covers three- 
fourths of the planet. In the US, the EPA estimates 
that pesticides (including cancer-causing pesti¬ 
cides) have contaminated groundwater in 38 states, 
thus polluting the primary drinking water source 
for more than half the country’s population. 

9. Organic farmers build soil rather than deplete 
it. 

10. Soil is the main focus of organic farming. We 
are facing the worst topsoil erosion in history ow¬ 
ing to chemical intensive, mono-crop farming. The 
Soil Conservation Service estimates that more than 
3 billion tons of topsoil are eroded from US crop¬ 
lands each year. This means that soil is eroding 
seven times faster than it is being replaced. 

11. Organic farmers work in harmony with nature, 
respecting the balance required of a healthy eco¬ 
system: wildlife is encouraged by including for¬ 
age crops in rotation and by retaining fence rows, 
wetlands, and other natural areas. 

12. Organic farmers have led the way, largely at 
their own expense, with innovative on-farm re¬ 
search aimed at minimizing the impact that agri¬ 
culture has on the environment. 

13. Organic producers strive to preserve diversity. 
The loss of a large variety of species (bio-diver¬ 
sity) is one of our most pressing environmental con¬ 
cerns. Organic farmers and gardeners have been 









Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases 


Chapter 27: Outer Healing 


collecting and preserving seeds, and growing un¬ 
usual varieties for decades. 

14. Organic farming helps keep rural communities 
healthy. 

15. The USDA predicts that by the year 2,000, half 
of the US farm production will come from 1% of 
farms. Organic farming may be one of the few sur¬ 
vival tactics left for the family farm and the rural 
community. 

16. Every food category has an organic alternative. 
Even non-food crops are also being grown organi¬ 
cally, including cotton. 

For further information contact: 

The Organic Trade Association 
PO Box 1078 

Greenfield, MA 01302 USA 
Phone 413-774-7511 
Web: http://www.ota.com 


Ayurveda and 
Environmental Home Safety 
An Ounce of Prevention 

In addition to buying and eating organic foods, 
we can further avoid polluting our home environ¬ 
ment. Below is a list of household and office prod¬ 
ucts that should be avoided and possible substi¬ 
tutes for them. For further information, read Debra 
Dadd’s book, Home, Safe Home. The book also 
gives many homemade ingredients for most healthy 
product substitutes. 

Suburban homeowners use more 
pesticides per acre on their lawns 
than farmers use on their fields 

Instead of using toxic pesticides, many pests can 
be eliminated using natural products, such as cay¬ 
enne pepper, strong mint tea, vacuuming, and keep¬ 
ing a clean home. Check your health food store 
for safe products, including termite, rat, and mice 
prevention products. 



Harmful Products 

Helpful Substitutes 

Non-organic fertilizer 

Organic fertilizer, compost, and seeds, 
neem/natural pesticides, traps, noise 
repellants, ladybugs. Certain flowers 
and plants repel insects. 

Toxic weed killers 

Grow and eat your own dandelions 
(provided they have not been sprayed 
with harmful substances). 

Genetically engineered foods 

Naturally grown foods 

Cleaning products, i.e., aerosol propellants, detergents, 
synthetic fragrances, lye, chlorine, artificial dyes, 
detergents, formaldehyde, petroleum distillates; ammonia 
(and all purpose cleansers), basin, tub, tile cleaners; 
bleach, dishwasher detergents & liquids; disinfectants, 
drain cleaners, fabric softeners, glass cleaners, laundry 
detergent & starch; mold & mildew cleaners, rug, carpet & 
upholstery shampoo; scouring powder, shoe polish, 
silver/metal polishes, spot remover, water softeners 

Homemade ingredients 
(see Home Safe Home by Dadd) 
or buy all these products in natural 
forms 

at health food stores 














The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Problem 

Natural Solutions 

Ants 

patchouli, chili pepper, 
paprika, dried peppermint, 
lemon juice; grow mint near 
entrances 

Beetles/ 

weevils 

add bay leaf to food products; 
use black pepper sacks in 
food bins 

Bugs and 
insects 

lavender, eucalyptus, vasdka 

Cock¬ 

roaches 

borax, bay leaves, eucalyptus 
oil 

Fleas 

vasdka 

Flies 

cloves, lavender, patchouli, 
vasdka 

Gnats & 

Moths 

patchouli 

Mosquitoes 

vasdka, lavender, patchouli 

Squirrels 

dried chille pepper 


Miscellaneous 

Air purifiers : Basil or tulsl (natural negative ion 
machines), cedar, frankincense, sandalwood, 
agnihotra (Vedic fire rituals). 

Plastic containers : Leach chemicals into the liquids. 
Use glass, stainless steel or ceramic containers in¬ 
stead. 

Cooking utensils : Cast iron, stainless steel, cop¬ 
per are best; non-stick and aluminum pans leech 
toxic chemicals into the food (aluminum foil is also 
not advised). 

Fabrics : Use natural fibers like cotton, linen and 
wool. Ideally organic, dye-free fabric is best for 
the skin, and for the earth. Products include cloth¬ 
ing, towels, sheets, bedding, blankets, and pillows. 
Paper products : Computer, typing, note and bath¬ 
room paper, and paper towels that are recycled 
and acid-free is safest for the environment. The 
dyes used to whiten paper also pollute the envi¬ 
ronment. 

Shopping : Carry cotton bags to the store to use 
instead of paper and plastic (or at least reuse the 
paper and plastic bags). Some health food stores 
also sell re-useable bags to carry fruit and veg¬ 
etables in. 

Other Products : Baby products, office, art and com¬ 
puter supplies; building & furnishing products, pet 
care, recycling garbage. 


Personal Care 

Use natural deodorants, cosmetics, bath products, 
body oils and powders, toothpaste, mouthwash, 
soaps, air fresheners, hair sprays, shampoos, hair 
coloring, hairspray, skin moisturizers, shaving 
cream. 

Non-organic personal care products have numer¬ 
ous toxic chemicals, including aerosol propellants, 
benzyl alcohol, artificial colors, synthetic fragrance, 
formaldehyde, ammonia, ethanol, glycerin, deter¬ 
gents, plastics, paraffin, saccharin, BHA- 
BHT. Substitutes found in health food stores con¬ 
tain none of these chemical toxins. 


Conclusion 

In summary, the underlying notion of Ayurveda 
is to cause no harm to oneself, others, animals, or 
to nature. This basic Vedic tenet of nonviolence is 
followed in action, word and thought. This is ac¬ 
complished by accepting all people and paths in 
life and quickly leads to peace, self-worth, appre¬ 
ciation and respect for all things. May you, dear 
readers, find and live in growing health and divin¬ 
ity, seeing the Divine in all. 


Aum Shanti, Shanti, Shanti 
Peace in the body, mind, and Soul. 
Health, Peace, Bliss 


























Appendix 1: Sanskrit Alphabet 


Appendix 1: Sanskrit Alphabet 


Vowels 

3T 3TT 5 | ^ 

A A I E U U 

3 3ft 3# 3T 3T: 

E AI O AU AN AHA 

^ H E?T 
R R LR 

Pronunciation 

A as in rural; A as in father 
I as in lily; I as in police 
U as in push; U as in rude 
E as in they 
AI as in aisle 
O as in home 

AU as in house AN as in th ong 
AH as in aha (accent the ‘h’) 

R as in merrily 
R as in marine (harder ‘r’) 

LR as in reve/rv 


Labials 'T ''h ^ 

(Lips) Pa Pha Ba Bha Ma 

Consonant Pronunciation 

Ka as in /cite; 

Kha as in inhhole 
Ga as in go; 

Gha as in loghouse 
N as in pink (nasal sound) 

Cha as in charge 

Chha as in Curchill (hard ‘h’) 

Ja as in joy 

Jha as in hc/hog (hedgehog) 

N as in hinge 

Ta as in /rust 
Tha as in an/hi 11 
Da as in afrum 
Dha as in red horn 
N as in one 

Ta as in /op 

Tha as in ho/house (tongue/teeth) 

Da as in dye 
Dha as in adhere 
Na as in nine 


Gutterals 

(back of 
throat) 


Consonants 



Pa as in poet 

^ TS *T 

Ka Kha Ga 

Gha 

3 

Na 

Pha as in uphill 
B a as in boat 
Bha as in ahhor 
Ma as in mother 


Palatals ^ 15 ET 

(back or Cha Chha Ja 

soft palate) 


Jha Nya 


Cerebrals Z Z 

(tongue on Ta Tha 
top palate) 


S Z ^ 

Da Dha Na 


Semivowels 


Dentals cT Z T *T 

(tongue Ta Tha Da Dha Na 

on teeth) 


^ ^ ET T 

Ya Ra La Va 











The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Sibilants (Hard) and Aspirate (Soft) 

^ f 

Sha Sha Sa Ha 

Miscellaneous Combinations 

'O CN 

Ki KI Ku Ku Ke Kai Kau Ko 
When vowels are written with consonants 
they look as above (using K as an 
example, such as kit, kola, etc.) 

(right side of ka is shortened) 

+ T = (ksha) 


Other common combinations are 


Ta + Ra = Tra 


k + of = ^r 
Ja + Na = Jna 


Da + Ya = Dya 


Ra + U = Ru 

+ cT = rb 
Ka + Ta = Kta 

Da + Dha = Ddha 


■T + ^ ^ (gda - the vertical bar is removed. 

This is true for all consonants with bars cha pT), nya 
(5), ‘a (^0, ta pi), tha (5), dha pT), na pT), pa ( T T), 
ba (p), bha pT), ma pf), and semi vowels ya pT), la 
pi), and va (p). 


Many more combinations exist - beyond the scope 
of this Ayurveda book. This brief introduction is 
merely to offer some basic guidance to those wish¬ 
ing to learn the alphabet and read the Sanskrit in this 
book. 





Appendix 2: Health Forms 


Appendix 2: Client Health Forms 

On the following page is a sample self-test to determine one’s mental and physical constitution or 
dosha. Read the topics in bold in the left column and circle the choice that best describes you (from the 
right three columns). Circle the descriptions most fitting to you. If you answer according to your entire 
life rather than your current condition, you will learn your lifelong dosha. You may again answer the 
questions according to your current situation to learn your current health balance ( vikriti). Add up the 
columns under the total sections. [You will also find an interactive dosha test online at our website 
http://ayurvedahc.com] 

The second and third pages of this series are examples of a health-history form used by Ayurvedic 
practitioners and vaidyas (Ayurvedic doctors). 





The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


BODY 

Vayu 

Pitta 

Kapha 

Body frame 

thin 

medium 

large 

Finger nails 

thin or cracking 

medium, pink, soft 

thick or white 

Pulse 

80-100 

70-80 

60-70 

Weight 

low or bony 

medium, muscular 

gains easily 

Stool-move bowels 

small, hard, gas 

loose or bums 

moderate or 
solid 

Forehead size 

small 

medium 

large 

Appetite 

variable 

strong or sharp 

constant or low 

Eyes 

small or unsteady 

reddish or piercing 

white or wide 

Voice 

low or weak 

high or sharp 

deep or tonal 

Fips 

thin or dry 

medium or soft 

large or smooth 

Chest 

flat, sunken 

moderate 

round, expanded 

Nature (bothers you most) 

cold and dry 

heat and sun 

cold and damp 

Chin 

thin or angular 

tapered 

round, double 

Neck 

thin or tall 

medium 

big, wide, folded 

Body Totals 




MIND 

$0 



Memory 

quick to grasp ideas-soon 
forgets 

sharp or clear 

slow to leam- 
but never forgets 

Beliefs 

radical, changing 

leader, goal oriented 

constant or loyal 

Dreams 

flying or anxious 

in color or fighting 

romantic or few 

Speech 

quick or talkative 

moderate or argues 

slow or silent 

Finances 

spends on trifles 

spends on luxury 

saves money 

Sleep 

light 

moderate 

heavy 

Habits 

travel or nature 

sports or politics 

water or flowers 

Mind 

quick or adaptable 

penetrating, critical 

slow or lethargic 

Emotions 

enthusiastic or worries 

warm, can get angry 

calm or attached 

Temperament 

nervous or fearful 

impatient 

easy going 

Mind Totals 







































Appendix 2: Health Forms 


Client Health Form 


Name 

Phone ( ) 

Address 

Cell ( ) 

Town 

State 

Zip 

Email 

Country 

Age 

Date 

Practitioner 

Marital Status 

Referred by 

Serious Childhood Diseases? 

Number of stools daily 

Highest Grade 

Career 

Current 

Medicines/Herbs 



Genetic/Heredity 

diseases 

Mother 

GMother 

GFather 

Father 

GMother 

GFather 

Brother 

Sister 

Relatives 

Do any family members have addictions? (e.g., alcohol, drugs, food)? 

Did you ever experience physical or emotional abuse? 

Career Satisfaction: Love the career OK career Not Good 

Family/Social Life: Good Average Poor 

Is your life purposeful? 

Is your life spiritual (your definition)? 

Reason for Visit? 



Turn to next page. Below is for office use 

Prakrti Body: V P K Mind: V P K 

Vikrti: V P K 

Pulse Quality: Snake Frog Swan 

Pulse Position: V P K 

Subdoshas 

Miscellaneous Pulses 

Pran 

Pachaka 

Kledaka 

Deep/Prakriti: 

V P K 

Upan 

Ranjaka 

Avalambaka 

Saman 

Sadhaka 

Bodhaka 

Apan 

Alochaka 

Tarpaka 

Spiritual Pulse 1: 

Vyan 

Bhrajaka 

Shleshaka 

Spiritual Pulse 2: 

Dhatus 

Tongue 

Rasa 

Mamsa 

Majja 


Rakta 

Medas 

Shuki'a 

Nails 

Asthi 


Notes: 




,2r "sfc 






































































The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Check Current Health Issue 


Check Current Health Issue 


Acidity/Acid reflux 


Gout 


Addiction 


Head 


Anemia 


Headaches/ Migraines 


Anger, Impatience 


Hemorrhoids 


Anorexia 


Hernia 


Arteriosclerosis 


HIV/AIDS 


Arthritis 


Immune System 


Asthma 


Jaundice 


Blood 


Lethargy 


Blood Pressure 


Metabolic/Endocrine 


Bones 


Menopause 


Bronchitis 


Mouth 


Cancer 


Muscles 


Cardiovascular 


Nervous System 


Cholesterol 


Nose 


Colic/abdominal pain/distention 


Rectum 


Colon 


Reproductive 


Constipation 


Respiratory 


Diarrhea 


Overweight 


Diabetes 


Parasites 


Ears 


PMS 


Edema 


Rheumatism 


Emotional 


Sinus 


Environmental allergies 


Skin disorders 


Epilepsy 


Small intestine 


Epstein Barr 


Throat 


Eyes 


Thyroid (hyper/hypo) 


Fever 


Tumors 


Food allergies 


Ulcers 


Fybromyalgia 


Worry, Fear, Anxiety, Nervous 


Gall Bladder 


Other 


Gastrointestinal 


Other 










































Appendix 3: Prakriti Food Plans 


Appendix 3:Praknti Food Plans 


Traditional Ayurvedic 
Life Health Analysis 
Vayu Doshas 

Your constitution is predominantly air. An excess 
of air element creates cold, light, and dryness in the 
body, colon, skin, and bones. When balanced, you 
are energetic, adaptable, and cheerful. An excess of 
air causes dry skin, gas, constipation, anxiety, 
nervousness, and worry. The aim of Ayurveda is to 
create a balance between the elements of air, fire, 
and water. To bring air into balance Vayu doshas need 
to 

• Consume more steamed, heavy and moist foods. 

• Ingest herbs to help digest the heavy foods. 

• Eat smaller meals, no more than 3 to 4 hours 
apart. 

• Eat sour, sweet, and salty substances that reduce 
excessive air. Pungent herbs, such as ginger, are 
good if combined with sweet, sour, and salty foods 
and herbs. 

• It’s better not to eat alone. Have your food 
cooked for you if possible. 

• Avoid nightshades (potatoes, tomatoes, 
eggplant, peppers, chilies) as they may cause allergic 
reactions. 

• Don’t combine milk with yeasted grains. 

• Eat in a calm to celestial frame of mind. 


HERBOLOGY 

DIGESTION Cardamom, coriander, cinnamon, 
ginger, rock salt are among the major herbs to use. 

ELIMINATION Licorice, soaked prunes, psyllium 
seeds, flax seeds, bran and triphala before sleep. 

ENERGY Ginseng, comfrey root, marshmallow, 
ashwagandha, bald, and shatdvari. 

MIND Calamus, ashwagandha, basil, chamomile, 
brdhml. 

ANTI-RHEUMATICS Angelica, myrrh, yogaraj 


guggul. 

OIL and MASSAGE Sesame oil and almond oil are 
heavy and warm, and therefore good for Vayu dosha. 
Oil massage the feet, head, back, and lower abdomen 
to reduce air. Essential oils include sandalwood, 
cinnamon, and fran ki ncense. 

FRUIT Most fruit is purifying, though not grounding. 
Dry fruit, melons, uncooked apples and pears, and 
cranberries increase air; they are not advised (baked 
apples and pears, or soaked dry fruits are alright). 
The best fruits for Vayu doshas are, lemons, limes, 
grapefruit, cherries, grapes, strawberries, raspberries, 
pineapples, papayas, mangos, soaked—prunes, 
raisins, dates, and figs; other berries, kiwi, sweet 
melons, and rhubarb. Second best are oranges, cooked 
pears, cooked apples, peaches, plums, apricots, 
pomegranates, and persimmons. Fruit is best eaten 
between meals. 

VEGETABLES also are too light for air constitutions 
to live on. However, if steamed and prepared with 
oils and spiced, eating them with whole grains is fine. 
The cabbage family causes gas (broccoli, cauliflower, 
Bmssels sprouts). Other air-increasing vegetables are 
cucumbers, sprouts, celery, asparagus, spinach, and 
chard. The best vegetables for Vayu doshas are sweet 
potatoes, carrots, beets, cilantro, parsley, seaweed, and 
small amounts of avocado. Second best are fresh com, 
green beans (well-cooked), fresh peas, zucchini, 
squash, artichoke, kir a, mustard greens, watercress, 
bell peppers, and okra. Some practitioners 
recommend moderate amounts of fenugreek greens, 
cooked leeks, black and green olives, parsnip, 
pumpkin, rutabaga, and watercress. 

GRAINS Cooked whole grains are best. Bread is fine 
if toasted (but the yeast in bread is still heavy and 
hard to digest). The best grains for Vayu doshas are 
wheat, then other moist grains like basmati rice, oats, 
and cous cous. Whole grain pasta is good. Dry grains 
lik e granola and chips aggravate the air element. 

BEANS Most beans cause gas, are drying, and 










The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


promote constipation. The best bean is mung. Tofu is 
also acceptable, but may be hard to digest. 

NUTS and SEEDS Raw or lightly roasted nuts are 
heavy, nourishing and moistening. They are hard to 
digest and so they are taken in small amounts at any 
one time. Vayu recommendations include almonds 
(peel off the skin), walnuts, pecans, pine nuts and 
sesame seeds (or tahini); these should be soaked 
overnight. 

OILS The best are sesame oil and ghee (one teaspoon 
per serving). Second best include almond, olive, 
avocado, and butter. 

DAIRY is good for air constitutions, though hard to 
digest. Dairy is taken with spices, and milk should 
be boiled then left to cool slightly. The best dairy for 
Vayu doshas include las si (1/2 cup yogurt to 1/2 cup 
water, digestive herbs, all mixed and drunk at 
mealtime to aid digestion). Ghee is also excellent. 
Other suggestions include yogurt, kefir, cream, sour 
cream, butter, and cottage cheese. A little cheese may 
be eaten (especially homemade paneer). 


SWEETENERS It is best not to eat sweets during 
meals. Natural sugars assist air types more than any 
other constitution in tissue building and body fluid 
maintenance. The best sweeteners are jaggery ( gud- 
Indian), turbinado sugar, or natural sugar cane (sold 
in stores as Sucanat), maple syrup, and raw sugar. 
Raw honey and fruit sugar are acceptable but in 
smaller amounts. 


ANIMAL PRODUCTS Generally it is best to avoid 
animal products except when needed to regain 
strength following illness. Animal products give 
strength but are inharmonious on finer levels. (Ghee 
and lassi are good substitutes). Next best is fish and 
eggs. White chicken and turkey are also acceptable. 


BEVERAGES Air constitutions require fluids. The 
best liquids are dairy, fruit or vegetable juices, tonic 
teas (taken with sweetener and milk), water with lime 
or lemon, and sour fruit juices. 

VITAMINS and MINERALS are not generally used, 
but if needed, the following are best for Vayu doshas: 
oily A, D and E, sour C, zinc, and calcium. Spices 
(e.g., ginger, cardamom) are taken with vitamins to 
aid digestion. 

Herbal Preparations: The average amount of herbs 
to take is between 1/4 to 1 teaspoon of an herb or of 
an herbal mixture 1/2 hour before meals. Ghee, honey, 
or water may be mixed herbs (until paste) (2 parts to 
one part herbs). It is also advisable to cook herbs in 1 
teaspoon of heated ghee or oil, and then add them to 
food. Teas can be made with 1 to 2 teaspoons of herbs. 

AROMA THERAPY Sandalwood, lotus, 
frankincense, cinnamon, or basil can be used as oil, 
incense, soap, or candles to calm the mind. 

COLOR THERAPY Most colors are uplifting, 
particularly white, yellow, gold, orange, and some 
red. Lighter and pastel shades are preferred. Dark 
grays, browns and black upset the wind element. 


GEM THERAPY Emerald, jade, peridot, yellow 
sapphire, topaz, and citrine set in gold. 






Appendix 3: Prakriti Food Plans 


CONDIMENTS A little rock salt improves di¬ 
gestion. Other suggestions include cardamom, 
fennel, ginger, cloves, coriander, cumin, basil, 
cinnamon, and fenugreek. 


YOGA Sitting and prone positions are good. Shoul¬ 
der stands and back bends are also helpful if there 
are no heart problems. Deep breathing promotes 
calming. 

MANTRAS 

Ram —for Divine protection, immune boosting, 
insomnia, anxiety, fear, mental disorders 

Hoom —wards off negativity, helps digestion, 
removes cima, and clears srotas (channels) 

Shreem —for general health, overall health and 
harmony, builds reproductive tissue. 

MEDITATION can be done anywhere, at any time, 
lying down, sitting, or walking. Mantras, thoughts, 
feelings, looking at nature, thinking about God, love, 
virtually anything that doesn’t cause strain or worry 
are acceptable forms of meditation. Practice giving 
up worry, fear, negativity, anxiety, and lack of faith. 
Knowledge and devotion are the most important as¬ 
pects to practice. If the opportunity arises, consider a 
meditation practice with a qualified spiritual teacher. 

Please Remember Do not force anything! If your 
system tells you it wants or doesn’t want something, 
countering these guidelines, by all means follow your 
intuition!! The Inner Self is the best healer. Ayurveda 
helps us take control of our health. Seasonal changes 
may also require some modification of these recom¬ 
mendations. Enjoy these suggestions and feel increas¬ 
ingly healthy and harmonious. 


Traditional Ayurvedic 
Life Health Analysis 
Vayu/Pitta Doshas 

Your constitution is predominantly air and fire. 
An excess of air element creates cold, light, and dry¬ 
ness in the body, and colon, s kin , and bones. When 
balanced, you are energetic, adaptable, and cheerful. 
An excess of air causes dry skin, gas, and constipa¬ 
tion. Fire excess causes heat in the form of hot tem¬ 
per, impatience, rashes, infections, ulcers, etc. 

When balanced, fire helps one be more goal-ori¬ 
ented, express leadership qualities, warmth, and gives 
physical strength. The aim of Ayurveda is to create a 
balance between the elements of air, water, fire, and 
earth. To bring air and fire into balance one needs to: 

• Consume more cooked, moist, and somewhat 
heavier foods. 

• Eat herbs to help digest the more grounding 
foods. 

• Avoid hot foods (e.g., onions, garlic, red 
peppers), fermented or fried foods, salt. 

• Eat smaller meals, no more than 3 to 4 hours 
apart. 

• Avoid nightshades (potatoes, tomatoes, 
eggplant, peppers, chilies) as they may cause allergic 
reactions. 

• Don’t combine milk with yeasted grains. 

• Don’t combine fruit with other foods. 

• Eat meals in a serene, thankful state of mind. 


HERBOLOGY 

DIGESTION Cardamom, cinnamon, fennel, mints, 
coriander. 


ELIMINATION Licorice, triphala (before sleep and 
in the morning), soaked raisins. 


Aum Shanti, Shanti, Shanti 
Peace. 


ENERGY Comfrey root, marshmallow, bala, and 
shatavan. 


f59& 








The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


MIND Calamus, basil, chamomile, gotu kola, 
ashwaganclha, jatamanshi (insomnia). 

ANTI-RHEUMATICS Angelica, myrrh, yogaraj 
guggul on occasion. 

OIL and MASSAGE Sesame oil is heavy and 
therefore grounding. Massage the feet, head, back, 
and lower abdomen with oil to reduce air. Include 
the chest and third eye. Brahml oil in the hair is 
excellent. Mahandrayan oil is said to help with pains, 
arthritis, and other pains and injuries. 

AROMATHERAPY Essential oils include 
sandalwood, rose, geranium, lily. 

FRUIT Most fruit is purifying, although it is not 
grounding. Soak dry fruit, and bake apples and pears. 
Sweet fruits of berries, cherries, coconut, fresh figs, 
grapes, kiwi, mangos, sweet melons, sweet oranges, 
peaches, pineapples, rhubarb, and plums are 
balancing. Avocado (small amounts), watermelon 
(chew and eat several of the seeds). 

VEGETABLES also are too light for air constitutions 
to live on. If vegetables are steamed and prepared 
with oils—and spiced, eating them with whole grains 
is acceptable. Most forms of squash (acom, butternut, 
scallopini, summer, winter and yellow creek neck), 
artichoke, asparagus, fresh com, cucumber, green 
beans, okra, sweet potatoes, rutabaga, and zucchini 
are excellent for balance. (The cabbage family causes 
gas, i.e., broccoli, cauliflower, Brussels sprouts; root 
vegetables like beets and carrots may cause too much 
heat). 

GRAINS Cooked whole grains are best. Bread is 
acceptable if toasted, but yeast (contained in bread) 
is not a recommended product because it is difficult 
to digest. White basmati rice, wheat, oats, amaranth, 
wild rice, cous cous are good. Dry grains like granola, 
chips aggravate the air element. Barley is good for 
reducing fire, but may create gas for the air aspect of 
your constitution. 


BEANS Most beans cause gas, are drying, and 
promote constipation. The best bean is mung. Tofu is 
also acceptable, but may be hard to digest. Aduki, 
soy cheese, soy milk, and tepery beans may be taken 
in moderation. 

NUTS and SEEDS Raw or lightly roasted nuts are 
heavy, nourishing, and moistening. They are hard to 
digest, thus, small amounts should be taken at any 
one time. Best is almonds (soaked overnight and 
peeled) and sesame seeds in moderation (grounds air); 
coconut and sunflower seeds are also good (cools fire). 

OILS Best is sesame oil (for air conditions) and ghee 
(clarified butter). Sunflower is better for fire-related 
issues; soy and unsalted butter are also good. 

DAIRY Is good very good in its organic state and/or 
from raw sources. It may be hard to digest. Dairy 
should be taken with spices; milk should be boiled, 
then cooled. Best is lassi (1/2 cup yogurt to 1/2 cup 
water; and digestive herbs, all mixed and drunk at 
mealtime to aid digestion). Ghee is also excellent. 
Other good dairy products includes yogurt, kefir, 
cream, unsalted butter, and cottage cheese. A little 
cheese is acceptable also, but only ‘renetless’ cheese 
qualifies as vegetarian. 

SWEETENERS It is best not to combine sweets with 
other foods. Use only natural sugars which aid air 
types more than any other constitution in tissue and 
body fluid maintenance. Best is jaggery (gwJ-Indian), 
turbinado, maple syrup, or Sucanat. Raw honey (for 
air conditions) is acceptable. 

CONDIMENTS Best is cardamom, fennel, 
coriander, cumin, cilantro, turmeric, vanilla, saffron, 
rose water, mint. Cinnamon, cloves, mustard seeds, 
pippall will aggravate fire conditions. 

ANIMAL PRODUCTS Generally it is better to avoid 
animal products except for strength when extremely 
ill. It gives strength, but is difficult to digest, is toxic 
and disharmonious on finer levels. Ghee and lassi 
are excellent substitutes. Next best is poached or 
boiled egg whites and white poultry because they are 
easily digested. 









Appendix 3: Prakriti Food Plans 


BEVERAGES Air/Fire constitutions need fluids. 
Suggestions include boiled milk, teas such as bansha 
(with milk), catnip, chamomile, elder flower, fennel, 
hibiscus, jasmine, lavender, lemongrass, licorice, 
lotus, marshmallow, oat straw, raspberry, rose, and 
saffron. All fruits, vegetables, and herbs listed above 
are good as juice. 

VITAMINS and MINERALS For air conditions, oily 
A, D, and E, sour C, minerals—particularly zinc and 
calcium. However, vitamins and minerals should be 
taken with spices to help digest them. For excess fire, 
B vitamins, K, calcium, and iron may be needed, but 
it is better to get them from steamed vegetables. 

Herbal Preparations: Take an average of between 
1/4 and 1 teaspoon of an herb or of an herbal mixture, 
1/2 hour before meals. You may mix them with twice 
as much ghee or water (until paste). It is also advisable 
to cook herbs in heated ghee or oil, and then add to 
your food. Teas can be made with 1 to 2 teaspoons of 
herbs. 


YOGA Sitting and prone positions are good; shoulder 
stands (so long as there are no heart problems) and 
back bends are also good. Deep breathing is calming. 

MANTRAS 

Shanti —for mental peace. 

Ram —for Divine protection, immune boosting, 
insomnia, anxiety, fear, mental disorders 

Hoom —wards off negativity, helps digestion, 
removes dma, and clears srotas (channels) 

Shreem —for general health, overall health and 
harmony, builds reproductive tissue. 

MEDITATION can be done anywhere, at any time; 
lying down, sitting, walking. It can be with a mantra, 
with a thought, a feeling; looking at nature, thinking 
about God, love; virtually anything that doesn’t cause 
strain, anger; or worry that you are not meditating 
properly. Practice giving up worry, fear, negativity, 
anxiety, impatience, anger, harsh speech, a critical 
mind, and lack of faith. Knowledge and devotion are 
the most important aspects to practice. 




AROMA THERAPY Sandalwood, rose, gardenia, 
jasmine (white flowers). Basil, frankincense, cedar, 
myrrh (warming). Aromas can be used as oil, incense, 
soap, candles, etc., to calm and refresh the mind. 

COLOR THERAPY Most colors are uplifting, 
particularly white, lighter, and pastel shades. Dark 
grays, browns, and black upset air and fire elements. 
White shades of green, pink, and blue (i.e., emerald, 
sky blue) are also very good colors for balance. For 
air, warmer colors like gold, yellow, and a bit of red 
are suggested. For fire, bright, cheery greens, such as 
emerald, are suggested. 

GEM THERAPY White stones, such as pearl and 
moonstone set in silver, are recommended for both 
air and fire. For air, red, yellow, or orange stones set 
in gold. For fire, green stones set in silver. 


EXERCISE Moderate; walking, swimming, 
trampoline, cross-country or downhill skiing. 

OIL MASSAGE Apply oils to heart, forehead (third 
eye), feet, lower back and belly, neck, and shoulders. 
Brdhmi oil for the head is excellent. Sesame or 
Sunflower is acceptable for the body. Mahdndrdyan 
oil is used for pains and arthritis. 

Please Remember Do not force anything! Listen to 
what your system tells you. One’s intuition is, in the 
final analysis, the best doctor. Enjoy these sugges¬ 
tions and feel an increasingly healthy and harmoni¬ 
ous life. 

Aum Shanti, Shanti, Shanti 
Peace 






The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Traditional Ayurvedic 
Life Health Analysis 
Vayu/Kapha Doshas 



Your constitution is predominantly air and wa¬ 
ter. An excess of air element creates cold, light, and 
dryness in the body—colon, skin, and bones, caus¬ 
ing dry skin, gas, and constipation. When balanced, 
air makes one energetic, adaptable, and cheerful. An 
excess of water creates moistness, coldness, and 
heaviness, leading to congestion, excess weight, and 
mental lethargy. When balanced, water creates loy¬ 
alty, consistency, and comfort. The aim of Ayurveda 
is to create a balance between the elements of air, 
water, fire, and earth. To bring air into balance one 
needs to: 

• Consume more cooked foods. 

• Take herbs that help digest food 

• Eat smaller meals, 3 to 4 hours apart. 
Breakfast may be skipped if so desired. 

• Eat mainly pungent, hot substances that reduce 
excessive air and water. Bitter foods are useful 
to reduce water, but increase air. Sweet foods 
reduce air but increase water. So, one must moni¬ 
tor the effects of the foods eaten. 

• Avoid nightshades (potatoes, tomatoes, egg¬ 
plant, peppers, chilies) as they may cause aller¬ 
gic reactions. 

• Don’t combine milk with yeasted grains. 

• Eat in a calm to celestial frame of mind. 


HERBOLOGY 

DIGESTION Cardamom, coriander, cinnamon, and 
ginger help digestion. 


ELIMINATION Licorice, prunes, psyllium seeds, 
flax seeds, bran, and triphala can be taken first thing 
in the morning. Triphala can also be taken before 
sleep. 

MIND Calamus, ashwagandha, basil, brdhmi, cha¬ 
momile. 










Appendix 3: Prakriti Food Plans 


ANTI-RHEUMATICS Angelica, myrrh. 

OIL & MASSAGE Sesame oil is suggested. Oil 
massage the feet, head, back, and lower abdomen. 
Essential oils include sandalwood, cinnamon, musk, 
frankincense, myrrh. 

ENERGY Ginseng, ashwagandha, bald, and 
shatdvan. 

FRUIT The best fruits are lemons, limes, grapefruit, 
apricots, berries, baked apples, cherries, peaches. 
Because this is a dual dosha, all other fruit intake 
should be monitored. 

VEGETABLES The cabbage family causes gas 
(broccoli, cauliflower, Brussels sprouts). Cucumbers, 
sprouts, celery, asparagus, spinach, and chard also 
increase air. Best are sweet potatoes, carrots, beets, 
cilantro, parsley, fresh corn, green beans (well 
cooked), fresh peas, squash, artichoke, kira, mustard 
greens, moderate amounts of fenugreek greens, 
cooked leeks, black and green olives, parsnips, and 
pumpkin. 

GRAINS Cooked whole grains are best. Bread is 
acceptable if toasted, but it best avoided (it contains 
yeast—difficult to digest). Basmati rice and barley 
(if it doesn’t cause gas) are the best grains. All other 
grains should be monitored owing to your dual dosha. 

BEANS Most beans cause gas, are drying, and spoon 
of an herb or of an herbal mixture should promote 
constipation. The best bean is mung. Tofu is also good, 
but may be hard to digest. If They can be mixed with 
twice as much raw there is no gas or constipation 
problem, then any honey, ghee, or water (until paste), 
With meals, bean is good to eat. 

NUTS & SEEDS Raw or lightly roasted nuts are 
heavy, nourishing, and moistening. They are hard to 
digest, thus, small amounts should be taken at any 
one time. The best is 3 to 5 almonds (soaked over¬ 
night and peeled), and sesame seeds. 

OILS Best is 2 to 3 teaspoons sesame oil or ghee per 
meal. 


DAIRY Is good for air constitutions, though hard to 
digest. It should be taken with spices. Milk should be 
boiled. Las si (1/2 cup yogurt to 1/2 cup water, or 1/4 
cup yogurt to 3/4 cup water if Kapha is excessed) 
mixed with digestive herbs and taken at mealtime, 
aids digestion. Ghee is also excellent. 

SWEETENERS It is best not to combine sweets with 
other foods. Use only natural sugars which aid air 
types more than any other constitution in tissue and 
body fluid maintenance. Raw honey is best for Vayu/ 
Kapha. Turbinado sugar or Sucanat may be used if it 
does not cause congestion. 

CONDIMENTS The best is cardamom, asafoetida, 
and fennel. Next best is ginger, cloves, coriander, 
cumin, cinnamon, basil, and fenugreek. 

ANIMAL PRODUCTS Generally it is better to avoid 
animal products except for strength when ill. It gives 
strength but is difficult to digest, is toxic, and 
disharmonious on finer levels. Ghee and las si are the 
best substitutes. Next best is eggs. Chicken and turkey 
(white meat) are also all right. 

BEVERAGES Herbal teas and vegetable or fruit 
juices should be taken using the recommended fruits 
and vegetables. 

Herbal Preparations: Between 1/4 to 1 teaapoon of 
an herb or of an herbal mixture should be taken 1/2 
hour before meals and during meals. They can be 
mixed with twice as much raw honey, ghee, or water 
(until paste). With meals, herbs can be sprinkled on 
food. They may also be cooked in heated ghee, then 
added to food. Teas can be made with 1 to 2 teaspoons 
of herbs. 

OIL MASSAGE Massage the feet, lower back, shoul¬ 
ders, and neck before bed or exercise. 

AROMA THERAPY Sandalwood, lotus, frankin¬ 
cense, cinnamon, basil and camphor can be used as 
oil, incense, soap, or candles to calm and refresh the 
mind. 








The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


COLOR THERAPY Most colors are uplifting, 
particularly yellow, gold, orange, and some red. 
Lighter and pastel shades are preferred. Dark grays, 
browns and black upset wind elements. 

GEM THERAPY Emerald, jade, peridot, yellow 
sapphire, topaz, and citrine set in gold are warming, 
and thus balancing for Vayu and Kapha. Ruby and 
garnet improve circulation and energy. Stones work 
best when set to touch the s ki n. 

YOGA Sitting and prone positions are good. Shoulder 
stands and back bends are also good. Standing 
postures are good for Kapha. Deep breathing and 
alternate nostril prdndydma are calming and 
balancing. 

MANTRAS 

Ram —for Divine protection, immune boosting, 
insomnia, anxiety, fear, mental disorders 

Hoom —wards off negativity, helps digestion, 
removes dma, and clears srotas (channels) 

MEDITATION Meditation can be done anywhere, 
at any time: lying down, sitting, or walking. It can be 
with a mantra, a thought, feeling, looking at nature, 
or thinking about God, or love. Virtually anything 
that doesn’t cause strain or worry is useful. Practice 
giving up worry, fear, negativity, anxiety, lack of faith, 
attachment, or greed. Knowledge and devotion are 
the most important aspects. 

EXERCISE Moderate to heavy; walking is best. 

Please Remember Do not force anything! Listen 
to what your system tells you. One’s intuition is the 
best doctor. Please enjoy these suggestions and feel 
an increasingly healthy and harmonious life. 

Aum Shdnti, Shdnti, Shdnti 
Peace 



Traditional Ayurvedic 
Life Health Analysis Pitta 
Doshas 

Your constitution is predominantly fire. An excess 
of the fire element creates heat in the body, specifically 
in the small intestines, fiver, spleen gall bladder, blood, 
and heart. When balanced, you are warm, adaptable, 
cheerful, goal oriented, have leadership qualities. An 
excess of fire causes heat-related behavior, such as 
hot temper, being overly critical and impatient, s kin 
rashes, allergies, eye problems, ulcers, diarrhea. The 
aim of Ayurveda is to create a balance between the 
elements of air, water, and fire. To bring fire into 
balance one needs to: 

• Consume more bitter and astringent energies in 
the form of food, aromas, and herbs. 

• Avoid hot foods (e.g., onions, garlic, red peppers), 
fermented or fried foods, salt. 

• Eat every 4 to 5 hours. 

• Avoid nightshades (potatoes, tomatoes, eggplant, 
peppers, chilies) as they may cause allergic reactions. 

• Don’t combine milk with yeasted grains. 

• Eat in a calm to celestial frame of mind. 

• Increase consumption of sweet fruit juices and 
herbal teas 

• Consume cold, heavy, moist, blander foods 

• Avoid alcohol and smoking because of their 
heating nature 

• Emotionally cultivate clarity rather than a critical 
nature 


HERBOLOGY 

DIGESTION: Coriander, mint, aloe, gentian, 
barberry, fennel, turmeric. 

ELIMINATION: Triphald, senna, boiled milk and 
ghee, rose petals, gokshura, guduchl. 

ENERGY: Shatdvarl, bald, dmalaki, saffron, aloe, 
licorice, guduchl, comfrey, Solomon’s seal, 
marshmallow, dandelion, burdock. 








Appendix 3: Prakriti Food Plans 


MIND: Gotu kola, sandalwood, bhrihgardj, rose, 
lotus, jatdmdnshi, chamomile, betony, 
chrysanthemum, hibiscus. 

DETOXIFICATION (blood, liver, etc.): Guggul, 
mahjishtha, gotu kola, mustci. 

HEART: Arjuna. 

FRUIT Most fruit is calming and cooling, 
harmonizing and thirst quenching. Apples, pears, 
pomegranates are excellent. Pineapples, cranberries, 
persimmons, melons, prunes, dates, figs, grapes are 
also very good. Mangos, plums, and raspberries are 
helpful. Sour and certain other fruits, such as lemons, 
limes, apricots, bananas, cherries, papayas, peaches, 
and strawberries, will aggravate heat. 

VEGETABLES Most vegetables are also good for 
Pitta dosha, especially if eaten raw or lightly steamed. 
The best vegetables are cauliflower, cilantro, alfalfa 
sprouts, sunflower sprouts, celery. Second best is 
broccoli, cabbage, Brussels sprouts, asparagus, 
lettuce, beans, peas, cucumbers, and okra. Finally, 
parsley, bell peppers, fresh corn, and squash are 
acceptable. Root vegetables (beets and carrots), 
nightshades (eggplant, tomato, potato), mustard 
greens, parsley, spinach, and sweet potatoes may 
cause difficulty. Hot spicy foods like chilies, garlic, 
onions, pickles, and radishes greatly increase the fire 
element. 

GRAINS Most grains are cooling for Pitta. The best 
are cooked whole wheat, basmati rice, oats, barley, 
granola, cous cous, and quinoa. Finally, long grain 
brown rice, blue com, and millet. Short grain brown 
rice, buckwheat, com, and rye may be too heating 
and create Pitta discomfort. Whole grain pastas are 
good. Yeast-free breads are good; bread containing 
yeast should be toasted. 

BEANS Best is mttng, which does not cause gas. Most 
beans are acceptable for Pitta dosha, though it is better 
to cook them with cumin or cardamom to aid in 
digestion. Also good are aduki, tofu, lima, kidney, 
soy, split, and chick peas. Lentils and peanuts may 

it* 


cause indigestion. (Some practitioners accept various 
forms of lentils). 

NUTS and SEEDS The best are coconut and 
sunflower seeds. Seeds are a preferred source of 
protein over fish and poultry. 

OILS Ghee (clarified butter), sunflower, butter 
(unsalted), soy. 

DAIRY Ghee, boiled milk (then left to cool), yogurt 
las si (1 part organic yogurt to 1 part water), cottage 
cheese (unsalted). 

SWEETENERS Most sweeteners are good, 
including Sucanat. It is better to avoid white sugar, 
honey; and molasses in excess. 

ANIMAL PRODUCTS Generally, it is better to avoid 
animal products except when needed for strength. 
Animal products give strength but are inharmonious 
on finer levels. Animal foods that balance Pitta include 
egg whites, chicken, and turkey (white meat). 

BEVERAGES Juice of aloe vera, apple, pear, berry, 
carob, vegetables according to above section, fig 
shake, milk boiled, other fruit juices mentioned above. 
Teas include alfalfa, barley, bansha, burdock, 
chamomile, chicory, chrysanthemum, dandelion, 
hibiscus, jasmine, lavender, lemon grass, nettle, 
raspberry, red clover, rose, saffron, sarsaparilla, mint. 

VITAMINS: B, K, calcium, iron Take with herbs, 
such as coriander, to digest vitamins. 

Herbal Preparations: The average amount of herbs 
to take is between 1/4 to 1 teaspoon of an herb or of 
an herbal mixture with meals. You may mix with twice 
as much ghee or with water (until paste). It is also 
advisable to cook herbs in heated ghee or oil and then 
add to your food. Teas can be made with 1 to 2 
teaspoons of herbs. You may also sprinkle herbs 
directly on meals. 









The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


OIL MASSAGE Massage the feet, lower back, shoul- Aum Shanti, Shanti, Shanti 
ders and neck before bed or exercise. Peace 


AROMA THERAPY Sandalwood, lotus, rose, 
jasmine, and any white flowers (cool energies) can 
be used as essential oil, incense, sachet, soap, or 
candles to calm and refresh the mind. 

COLOR THERAPY Green, sky blue, or white to 
reduce Pitta. Reds, oranges, yellows, and bright colors 
aggravate Pitta. Apply color suggestions to home and 
office furnishings and clothing. 

GEM THERAPY Emerald, jade, peridot, moonstone 
and pearl, blue sapphire and amethyst set in silver. 

YOGA Sitting and prone positions are good for Pitta 
dosha. Shoulder stands (only if there is no heart 
problems) and back bends are also good. Deep 
breathing is calming. 

MEDITATION can be done anywhere, at any time; 
lying down, sitting, walking. It can be with a mantra, 
with a thought, a feeling, looking at nature, thinking 
about God, or love, or virtually anything that doesn’t 
cause strain or worry. Practice giving up anger and 
impatience. Knowledge and devotion are the most 
important aspects. 

MANTRAS Chanting, contemplation of ‘Who am 
I?’ Practice giving up hostility, anger, and criticism. 
Shanti —for peace 

Shrim —for general health and harmony 



LIFESTYLE Take walks by the water or in gardens 
in the full moon. Work in flower gardens and prac¬ 
tice sweet speech, forgiveness, and contentment. 
Moderate exercise. Walking is best. 


Please Remember Do not force anything! Listen to 
what your system tells you. One’s intuition is the best 
doctor. Please enjoy these suggestions and feel an 
increasingly healthy and harmonious life. 








Appendix 3: Prakriti Food Plans 


Traditional Ayurvedic 
Life Health Analysis 
Pitta/Kapha Doshas 

Your constitution is predominantly fire and water. 
An excess of fire and water elements creates cold 
and heat, and heaviness and dampness in the body, 
specifically in the chest, lungs, sinuses, stomach, and 
small intestines. When balanced, you are adaptable 
and cheerful, goal-oriented, and a leader. An excess 
of fire causes heat-related issues like hot temper, being 
overly critical and impatient, skin rashes, allergies, 
eye problems, ulcers, and diarrhea. An excess of water 
creates bronchitis, overweight, and mental lethargy. 
The aim of Ayurveda is to create a balance between 
the elements of air, water, and fire. To bring fire and 
water into balance one needs to: 

• Consume more bitter and astringent energies in 
the form of food, aromas, herbs. 

• Avoid nightshades (potatoes, tomatoes, eggplant, 
peppers, chilies) because they may cause allergic 
reactions. 

• Avoid hot foods (e.g., onions, garlic, red peppers), 

fermented or fried foods, salt. 

• Don’t combine milk with yeasted grains. 

• Eat in a calm to celestial frame of mind. 


HERBS Coriander, mint, rose petals, saffron, 
turmeric, triphala, guggul, gokshura, amalaki, 
manjishtha, arjuna, gotu kola, chamomile, 
cardamom, guduchl, jatamanshi, musta, raspberry, 
shildjit. 

FRUIT (between meals): Apples, mango, pears, 
pomegranate, prunes, quince, raisins. 

VEGETABLES Asparagus, bell pepper, broccoli, 
Brussels sprouts, burdock root, cabbage, fresh com, 
cauliflower, celery, green beans, dandelion, collards, 
lettuce, okra, parsley, peas, green peppers, squash 
(scallopini, spaghetti, summer, yellow creekneck), 
sprouts, watercress. 

Avoid or reduce as much as possible, ingesting 
fermented foods, pickles, onions, garlic, and c hili es 
because they will aggravate Pitta. 


GRAINS Barley is best, basmati rice, cooked oat 
bran, wheat bran (moderation). Bread without yeast 
(or toasted) is advised. 

BEANS The best is mung, which does not cause gas. 
Aduki, black, black-eyed, chana dal (garbanzos), 
lima, navy, pinto, white, and tur dal are acceptable. 

NUTS and SEEDS Pumpkin and sunflower in 
moderation. 

OILS Ghee (clarified butter) can be taken in 
moderation (2 tsp./day). Sunflower in moderation. 

DAIRY Ghee, yogurt las si (1 part organic yogurt to 3 
parts water). 

SWEETENERS It is better to use very little. Either 
raw honey or a cane sugar, such as turbinado or 
Sucanat, can be used sparingly. 

ANIMAL PRODUCTS Generally it is better to avoid 
animal products except for strength when ill. It gives 
strength but is inharmonious on finer levels. Ghee 
and lassi are good substitutes. Acceptable foods 
include poached or boiled egg white, and white meat 
of chicken and turkey. 

BEVERAGES Juice of aloe vera, apple, pear, berry, 
carob, fig shake, and fruits and vegetables mentioned 
above. Teas of alfalfa, barley, bansha, burdock, 
chamomile, chicory, chrysanthemum, dandelion, 
hibiscus, jasmine, lavender, lemon grass, nettle, 
raspberry, red clover, rose, saffron, sarsaparilla, mint. 

Herbal Preparations: Between 1/4 to 1 teaspoon of 
an herb or of an herbal mixture should be taken 1/2 
hour before meals. Twice as much ghee or water are 
mixed with herbs (until paste). It is also advisable to 
cook herbs in heated ghee, then add them to your 
food. Teas can be made with 1 to 2 teaspoons of herbs. 











The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


OIL MASSAGE Massage the feet, lower back, shoul- what your system tells you. One’s intuition is the best 
ders and neck before bed or exercise. doctor. Please enjoy these suggestions and feel an 

increasingly healthy and harmonious life.. 

AROMA THERAPY Sandalwood, lotus, rose, jas¬ 
mine (cool energies); mixed with frankincense, cin- Aum Shanti, Shanti, Shanti 
namon, basil, camphor (warm energies) can be used Peace 
as oil, incense, soap, or candles to calm and refresh 
the mind. 


COLOR THERAPY Reds, oranges, yellows, and 
bright colors will help Kapha, but will tend to aggra¬ 
vate Pitta. Green and sky blue are best. White and 
pink reduce Pitta but will derange Kapha. Choose 
colors as needed for home and office furnishings and 
in clothing. 

GEM THERAPY Emerald, jade, peridot, moonstone, 
and pearls set in silver reduce Pitta.. Ruby and gar¬ 
net, yellow sapphire, topaz and citrine, improve cir¬ 
culation and energy for Kapha. 

YOGA Sitting and prone positions are good when Pitta 
is in excess; standing postures are best when Kapha 
is aggravated. Shoulder stands (only if there are no 
heart problems, blood, ear, or eye pressure) and back 
bends are also good. Deep breathing is calming. 

MANTRAS Chanting, contemplation on ‘Who am 
I?,’ practice giving up hostility, anger, and criticism; 
visualize meditating on specific deities of your choice, 
such as Christ, Krishna. 



MEDITATION can be done anywhere, at any time, 
either lying down, sitting, or walking. It can be with 
a mantra, with a thought, a feeling, looking at nature, 
thinking about God, or love; virtually anything that 
doesn’t cause strain or worry. Practice giving up 
worry, fear, negativity, anxiety, and lack of faith. 
Knowledge and devotion are the most important as¬ 
pects to practice. 

EXERCISE Moderate to strong; walking is best. 



Please Remember do not force anything! Listen to 








Appendix 3: Prakriti Food Plans 


Traditional Ayurvedic 
Life Health Analysis 
Kapha Doshas 

Your constitution is predominantly water. An excess 
of water element creates cold, heavy, and dampness 
in the body; specifically in the chest, lungs, and 
sinuses. When balanced, you are loyal and calm by 
nature. An excess of water causes water retention (e.g., 
edema, overweight), sinus problems, bronchitis. The 
aim of Ayurveda is to create a balance between the 
elements of air, water, and fire. To bring water into 
balance one needs to: 

• Consume more steamed, light, hot, and dry 
foods. 

• Take herbs to help digest the heavy foods. 

• Eat smaller and fewer meals; eat more herbs. 

Breakfast may be skipped. 

• Eat pungent, bitter, and astringent foods to 
reduce excessive water. 

• It is better to cook for others, especially for 
Vayu individuals. 

• Do not use food as an emotional support. 


HERBOLOGY 

DIGESTION Hot spices: Dry ginger, black pepper, 
cloves, and cinnamon improve the metabolism. 
Bitters: Aloe, turmeric, barberry, and gentian reduce 
the desire for sugars and fats. 

ENERGY Pungent and bitter tonics: Black pepper, 
cinnamon, saffron, ginger, shilcijit, guggul, myrrh, 
aloe gel, or juice. 

MIND Stimulants and mental clearing: musk, gotu 
kola (brahml), basil (tulsl), guggul, myrrh, sage, 
bayberry, betony. 

FRUIT Generally increases water, causing mucus and 
depressing the digestive fire (agni). It is better to not 
combine fruits with other foods. Best are lemon, 
limes, and grapefruits (which dissolve mucus and 
reduce fat). They should be eaten without sugar. Other 
good fruits include cranberries, apples, and dried 
fruits. 


VEGETABLES Most are diuretics (naturally drawing 
water from the system). Steamed vegetables are 
easiest on the digestive system. The best are chilies, 
broccoli, cabbage, and celery. Next best are carrots, 
green beans, fresh peas, beets, asparagus, lettuce, 
cilantro, watercress, mustard greens, alfalfa, 
sunflower sprouts, and chard. Third best are bell 
peppers, cauliflower, parsley, and spinach. Other 
vegetables increase water. 

GRAINS are nourishing and balancing for Kapha 
dosha. Whole grains of barley, quinoa, dry or popped 
grains are best. Second best are com, millet, rye, and 
buckwheat. Basmati rice is alright in moderation. 
Barley is a diuretic that reduces water and weight. 
Avoid yeasted breads. 

BEANS Most beans are good, particularly aduki, 
followed by soy, lima, and lentils. Other useful beans 
include tofu, mung, kidney, peanut (but not roasted), 
and split peas. Mung is a pure or sattwic bean, and 
will not encourage gas. 

NUTS and SEEDS are eaten only in small quantities 
because they are heavy and hard to digest. Sunflower 
and pumpkin are acceptable. These are a good meat 
(protein) substitute. 

OILS in moderation: Mustard, canola, sunflower, 
safflower. Com oil is also acceptable. 

DAIRY Buttermilk (lassi: 1/4 cup organic yogurt: 3/ 
4 cup water) with meals; soy milk and goat’s milk 
are acceptable when there are no congestion or 
digestive disorders. 

SWEETENERS A little raw honey is acceptable. 

CONDIMENTS Cardamom, ginger (dry), mustard 
horseradish, turmeric, cloves. Second best 

are cinnamon, coriander, basil, cilantro, and parsley. 
Avoid salt because it retains water in the body (if 
absolutely necessary, black or rock salt may be used 
because it is the least aggravating). 

ANIMAL PRODUCTS are best avoided, except if 
the person is extremely weak. Animal products boost 








The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


strength, but are inharmonious, toxic, increase water, 
and do not generate new tissue growth. White, lean 
poultry is the least aggravating. 

BEVERAGES Astringent or pungent teas (warm or 
at room temperature): Alfalfa, raspberry, hibiscus, and 
dandelion. Boiled, organic goat’s milk (without food) 
with cinnamon and honey. Pineapple, pomegranate, 
cranberry, grapefruit, lemon, and lime juices are good. 
Celery and other green vegetable juices are also 
helpful. Avoid wine, alcohol, ice, or any cold drinks. 

Herbal Preparations: The average amount of herbs 
to take is between 1/4 to 1 teaspoon of an herb or of 
an herbal mixture just after meals. Twice as much 
raw honey, ghee, or water may be mixed with herbs 
to form a paste. It is also advisable to cook herbs in a 
little oil or ghee, then add them to your food. Teas 
can be made with 1 to 2 teaspoons of herbs. 

OIL and MASSAGE Warm and light oils, such as 
canola, mustard, flaxseed (linseed), or dry rough 
massage are advised. Rubbing alcohol mixed with 
warm herbal oils (eucalyptus, frankincense, myrrh, 
clove, cedar, cinnamon, mustard) is also good. These 
oils stimulate and clear the mind. 

AROMA THERAPY Frankincense, myrrh, cedar, 
cloves, cinnamon, and musk stimulate and clear the 
mind. Use as incense, soap, sachet, or candles. 

COLOR THERAPY Warm, bright colors: Yellow, 
orange, gold, or red. Avoid white, or pale shades of 
blue, green, and pink. Use black, brown, and gray in 
moderation, or not at all. Colors apply to clothing, 
office, and home furnishings. 

GEM THERAPY Ruby, garnet, and cat’s eye set in 
gold are warming, and therefore, reduce water. 
Weight-reducing gems: amethyst and lapis, set in 
gold, and worn with warmer stones. Set rings or 
pendants to touch the s ki n for the strongest effect. 

YOGA Strong workouts and more standing postures, 
along with headstands (if there is no heart condition). 


Solar Pranayama and breath of fire (bhastrika) 
breathing are advised. 

MANTRAS Stimulating and clearing mantras: are 
useful, like Aym, Hreem, Hoom are useful. 

MEDITATION Devotion (bhakti) and service 
(karma) harmonize one’s nature. Worship the Divine 
as a particular deity or incarnation you like, e.g., 
Rama, Krishna, or Christ. Renounce greed, desire, 
attachment and sentimentality to clear the mind. 
Chanting is excellent. 

LIFE STYLE Strong and aerobic workouts, sun-bath¬ 
ing, warm breezes, discipline, physical hardship. Stay 
up at night, avoid day naps, increase mental stimula¬ 
tion, travel, and pilgrimage. Avoid cold and damp¬ 
ness. 

Please remember do not force anything! Listen to 
what your system tells you. One’s intuition is the best 
doctor. Please enjoy these suggestions and feel an 
increasingly healthy and harmonious life. 

Aum Shanti, Shanti, Shanti 
Peace 















Appendix 3: Prakriti Food Plans 


Tridosha Food Plan 

If persons have an equal amount of all three doshas , 
food plans depend upon whether they are healthy or 
have some illness. If ill, Ayurvedic practitioners 


determine the dosha or doshas causing the il lness and 
suggest the food plan that reduces that excessed dosha 
(i.e., a vakriti- reducing diet). When tridoshic persons 
have no health concerns, they are able to eat all foods 
in moderation. 







The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 



Ayurvedic Vegetarian Food Pyramid 




































Ayurvedic Resources 


Ayurvedic Resources 


Ayurveda Holistic Centers 

Ayurveda Holistic Center (main center) 

Swami Sada Shiva Tlrtha, D.Sc. 

82A Bayville Ave. 

Bayville, NY 11709 USA 
516-628-8200 

Website: http://ayurvedahc.com 

Sister Centers 

Uniyal Clinic 

Dr. Ram Chandra Uniyal 

Bhai Rava Chowk 

Uttarkashi, Himalayas 249193 

India 

Maa Parvati Memorial Clinic & 

Himalayan Vaidyasala (Pahcha Karma Spa) 

Dr. J.K. Chandhok & Dr. Archana Chandhok 
Main Market 

Uttarkashi, Himalayas 249193 
India 


Consultations 

The Ayurveda Holistic Center offers interna¬ 
tional consultation options at our center, online con¬ 
sultations, and by phone and fax. For more infor¬ 
mation call or see our website. 516-628-8200. http:/ 
/ay urvedahc.com. 

Ayurveda - Learn your constitution (dosha) and 
receive suggestions for a healthier life-style (i.e., life- 
balance) including herbs, nutrition, aromas, colors, 
yoga, mantras, dha mia/life -purpo se counseling, 
much more. Three half-hour sessions. 

Jvotish Spiritual Astrology - Life readings cover 

1) Medical astrology 

2) Spiritual career/life-purpose (one’s God-given or 
innate gifts (, dharma ) 

3) Spiritual/healthy relationships 

4) Personal spiritual insights for liberation 


Therapies are offered to balance and strengthen 
planetary effects; e.g., seed mantras, gems, yantras, 
herbs, diet, meditation, planetary lords, colors, and 
planetary trends throughout life. 

Optional Readings: Dharma (adults and 
children), Student’s Major, Career. 

School of Ayurveda 

Certification & Ph.D. Programs 

We offer a 2 year certification training program 
by distance learning (using email, mail and phone) 
for health professionals and those wishing to enter 
the holistic health field. Upon graduation, students 
with MA/MS may transfer credits towards their 
Ayurvedic Ph.D. (see “Degree Programs” below). 
Full information online: http://vedicschool.com 

Program Information : The program is designed for 
health care professionals (i.e., MD’s RN’s, phar¬ 
macists, chiropractors, psychologists, yoga teach¬ 
ers, herbalists, holistic practitioners, etc., or for per¬ 
sons planning to practice Ayurveda full or part-time. 
Full details: http://vedicschool.com 

The teaching method includes complete theoreti¬ 
cal, practical, and spiritual elements. Students gradu¬ 
ate experiencing 40 mock-consultations. 

Required Texts: 

The Ayurveda Encyclopedia (class workbook) and 
Year 1 - 2: YogaVani, Guru Bani, Gita, Ayurveda 
Primer CD-Rom, Upanishads 

Programs taught by 

Distance Learning: Swami Sada Shiva Tirtha 
Australia: 1 & 3 year certification (vedicschool.com) 

Advisors: Dr. S.N. Shrivastava BAMS, Dr. R.C. 
Uniyal BAMS, Dr. J.K. Chandhok, BAMS 

Gentle, natural, personal. The practitioner 
integrates all forms of holistic healing through this 
unique healing system. 








The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Online: 2-Year Certification: 990 hrs. Syllabus 
Year 1 Theory & Practical Consultation 

Training: 11 months 

Course Number and Title 

AY01-1 & AY01P: Fundamentals & History of 
Ayurveda [1 month]: Ayurvedic Anatomy & 
Physiology, Cause of Illness, Doshas, Sub- 
Doshas & Dhatus, Srotas, 3-Malas, 6 tastes, 10 
qualities, rasa-vlrya-vipaka, mental qualities: sattwa- 
rajas-tamas & prana-tejas-ojas, 13 natural urges, 
external influences, Agni, ama & ojas, 

Root Cause of Illness 

AY02-1 & AY02P-1: Analysis & Herbology [1 
month]: How to determine one’s mental & physical 
dosha, prakrti & vikrti, 5 methods of determining 
an illness (nidan-purvarupa-rupa-upashaya- 
samprapti), Seasonal affect on dosha & health, 6 
stages of disease development, Ayurvedic Etiology 
- How to find the root-cause of disease, Ayurvedic 
pulse analysis, nail, tongue, face, eye analysis, 85 
herb materia medica studied in detail 

AY03-1 & AY03P: Ayurvedic Nutrition & Pancha 
Karma I [1 month]: 7 Doshas Food plans, Pancha 
Karma Therapy Part I 

AY04-1 & AY04P: Pancha Karma II and 
Aromatherapy [1 month]: Abhyanga & Marma 
therapies, Kerala Pancha Karma, Beauty Care, 
Aromatherapy 

AY05-1 & AY05P: Hatha Yoga, Pranayama, 
Mantras, Music & Meditation Therapies [1 month]: 
Asanas, Pranayama, Kumbhaka, Bandhas, Mudras, 
Yoga for pregnancy & Postpartum, Yoga for 
children, office, the elderly and the physically 
challenged, Mantra & Chakra Therapies, Sound, 
Music, Color & Gem Therapies 

AY06-1 & AY06P: External Health Factors: Life¬ 
style, Seasonal Considerations, Environmental 
Therapies, Ayurvedic Psychology & Spirituality [1 
month]: Seasonal, life-style & exercise 
considerations. Vedic Psychology & Dosha 
Personalities, Spiritual Counseling, Meditation, 
Ethics & Virtue (Yama/Niyama), Service & 
Devotion, Naturalness & Purity, Physical, Astral & 


Causal Bodies & the 5 delight cells 

AY07-1 & AY07P: The Ayurvedic View of the 
Circulatory System [1 month] 

AY08-1 & AY08P: The Ayurvedic View of the 
Digestive System [1 month] 

AY09-1 & AY09P: The Ayurvedic View of 
Infections & Wounds; the Respiratory & Urinary 
Systems [1 month] 

AY10-1 &AY10P: The Ayurvedic View of the Ears, 
Nose Throat, Mouth & Eyes & the Nervous System 
[1 month] 

AYLECT-1: Complete one article & one lecture 

Mid-Program Exam - 1 month to complete 

Year 2 Theory & Practical Consultation 

Training: 11 Months 

AY 11-1 & AY IIP: The Ayurvedic View of the S ki n 
System & Vedic Ethics [1 month] 

AY 12-1 & AY12P: The Ayurvedic View of 
Neoplasm/Abnormal Growths I [1 month]: 

AY 13-1 & AY13P: The Ayurvedic View of 
Neoplasm/Abnormal Growths II [1 month] 

AY14-1 & AY14P: Ayurveda and the Female 
Reproductive System [1 month] 

AY15-1 & AY15P: Ayurvedic Childbirth I [1 
month]: 

AY 16-1 & AY16P: Ayurvedic Childbirth II & the 
Male Reproductive System [1 month] 

AY17-1 & AY17P: The Ayurvedic View of the 
Immune System [1 month] 

AY 18-1 & AY18P: The Ayurvedic View of the 
Metabolic System [1 month] 

AY 19-1 & AY19P: Therapeutic Applications & 
Ayurvedic Pharmacology [1 month]: 3-vital organs 
(head, heart, bladder), headaches/migraines, arthritis, 
rheumatism, dangerous spiritual practices, 










Ayurvedic Resources 


recipes, medicated herbal wines, mineral tissue¬ 
building therapies, organs & herbs, herb timing, 
preparations. 

AY20-1 & AY20P: External-Based Therapies [1 
month]: Beauty care & skin, Architecture (Vastu 
Shastra & Feng Shui), Vedic astrology (Jyotish), 
East-West language bridging, Scientific Research. 

AYLECT-2: Complete one article & one lecture 

Second Year Final Exam - 1 month to complete 

Australia Residential Certification 

Our 1 yr certification & 3 yr diploma is nationally 
accredited. Details at http://vedicschool.com 

Degree Programs 

Upon graduation from this training program one 
receives certification. Credits are direcdy transferable 
toward a Ph.D. degree in Ayurvedic medicine 
through Westbrook University. 

Graduates’ Comments 

‘I have previously studied Western and Chinese 
medicine...the Ayurvedic approach is the most ef¬ 
fective and easy to understand.’ - Dr. F. Cassis/NY 

‘The information was presented simply, spiritually, 
and practically...I have already begun Ayurvedic 
consultations and incorporated my other holistic 
trainings...This course and the teacher were truly 
an inspiration.’ - W. Lawder/NJ 

‘I very much enjoy helping people, so I was search¬ 
ing for a healing program that will help me help 
others. This course have given me everything that I 
was looking for.’ - T. Fyssoun/Greece 

Call or email for questions and registration: 
516-628-8200 mail@ayurvedahc.com 
FAQ & registration: http://ayurvedahc.com 
2 $ 2 $ 2 $ 

Ayurveda Holistic Community -online 

We have grateful to now offer a free, interactive 
online community where we offer Ayurveda article 


and research journals, practitioner directory, e-maga¬ 
zine, forums, dosha test, recipes, meditation room, 
resources, humor, music, poetry and more. We also 
offer solutions, articles, and links for environmen¬ 
tal, social, educational, and spiritual health, http:// 
ayurvedahc.com 

ISHTAA (International Spiritual Holistic Think¬ 
ing Ayurveda Association) 

With the explosion of interest in Ayurveda, there 
has been little discussion of spiritual, social, and en¬ 
vironmental aspects to this science of life. To that 
end we have formed an informal group for people 
wishing to share ideas and activities that include 
these aspects of Ayurveda, http://ishtaa.org 

International Vedic Institute 
Online Continuing Education Classes 

Complete classes on major health conditions (e.g. 
arthritis, cholesterol). Fearn which foods, herbs, 
yoga, and other therapies can help. 
http://vedicschool.com/ 

Other Books from the 
Ayurveda Holistic Center Press 
Yoga Vani: 

Instructions for the Attainment of Siddhayoga 

by the late Swami Shankar Purushottam Tlrtha, 
founder of the Siddhayogashram & Shankar Math 
in India. The topics discussed include sadhana 
(meditation) experiences, how to find a guru, when 
to change gurus, discussions of kundalini shakti- 
pat, sushumnd, the 10 chakras, yoga, and much 
more. 

Guru Bani: 100 Ways to Attain Peace 

by Swami Shankar Purushottam Tirtha. This sequel 
to Yoga Bani offers simple guidance on how to live 
spiritual, ethical lives outside of meditation (for fami¬ 
lies and monks). 

Swami Narayan Tirtha Math (ashram) 
Discussion of spiritual topics. 
http://www.swaminarayantirtha.org 





The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


The Ayurveda Primer: CD-Rom E-book 
Introduction, Case Studies & Research 
by Swami Sadashiva Tirtha, D.Sc. 

A new appoach is taken in this introductory e- 
book. Many topics are discussed by organizing the 
most commonly asked questions by new-comers to 
Ayurveda. All topics are covered very simply. 
Seven meditation videos are included. For those 
who have Adobe Acrobat you may hear the audio 
glossary. $18 http://vedicvendor.com 

v^O vSO 

Other Ayurvedic Resources 

See our updated online international listings of 
everything Ayurvedic: http:// 

www. ay urvedahc .com/klink/ayurveda 

USA resources 

Herbs: Bazaar of India : ayur-veda.com 
Herbs: Fairdeal Distributors : lotusfair.com 
Herbs: HimalavaUSA : himalayausa.com 
Herbs: Banyan : banyanbotanicals.com 

Organic Ghee: Purity Farms 800-568-4433 
BeautyCare Training: www.melaniesachs.com 

See our other online holistic resources (organic foods 
and clothing, non-toxic products, Fair Trade social 
entrepreneurs, Indian music, Hinduism, Sanskrit, 
more; at http://www.ayurvedahc.com/klink/ 

Pancha Karma Clinics in India 

Among the respected clinics, living conditions 
and prices vary. In spas offering air conditioning 
and other comforts, the prices can double. General 
treatments last from 2-4 weeks. Chronic or severe 
conditions (e.g., paralysis) can take longer. 

Ayurvedic spas have proliferated since 2000 and 
they can be found in every major city, making it 
quite convenient. Kerala pancha karma treatments 
are most popular. However, with the explosion of 
popularity also comes increased costs. 

It is advised to seek out local people to find a 
reputable pancha karma clinic that doesnt charge 
too much. 

Our sister center in the village of Uttarkashi in 
the Himalayas, has a beautiful, authentic, and 


reasonably priced center across from the Ganga river. 
They are a ‘Fair Trade’ spa, employing local villagers 
to help raise themselves out of poverty. 

The spa also offers herb walks and Himalaya 
day treks. Pickup from airport available. 

Full details: 

http ://ay urvedahc .com/HimalayanVaidyashala.htm 
or mail to: 

Maa Parvati Memorial Clinic 

& Himalayan Vaidaysala - Main Market 
Uttarkashi, Himalayas 249193 India 

The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 

Available Internationally 
Australia: John Reed Books - 61-02-4997-2936 
johnreed@barcode.com.au 
Canada: Mond Trading 416-504-5755 

www.herbiesherbs.com 
Manda Group 416-516-0911 

general@mandagroup.com 
India: Sri Sat Guru Press - (91) 11-2743-4930 

(hardcover) indianbookscentre.com 
Jain Books (paperback) 
New Zealand: Jay Books - 04-586-0226 
North Africa & Middle East: 

I.PR - Cyprus (357) 22-357-836 
iprschl@ spidemet.com.cy 

South Africa: 

Phambili Agencies - Germiston 011-873-3461 

UK/Europe: Gazelle Books - 44-1524-68765 

Sales@gazellebooks.co.uk 

Singapore & Malaysia 

Fathima News Enterprise - (65) 6220-0532 
fneariff @ singnet.com. sg 
Malaysia, Brunei, Indonesia, Hong Kong, Philipines: 

Wharton Books - Singapore (65) 6276 8280 

ganesan @ goodbooks .com. sg 

Amazon.com (UK, Germany, France, Japan) 
Amazon.com international Ayurveda Bestseller! 











Curriculum Vitae 


About the Author 

1974 Began practicing organized meditation 

1975 BA - Interdisciplinary Studies 

1976 Certified meditation teacher 

1980 MA - Non-verbal Communications research 

1988 Ayurveda certification: Ayurvedic Institute 

Jyotish (Vedic astrology) certification: American Institute of Vedic Studies 
Began an Ayurveda and Jyotish consultation practice 

Visited India; initiated into science of mysticism by his guru (spiritual teacher) 

Swami Narayan Tlrtha 

Advanced Ayurveda training with Benares Hindu University professors: Varanasi, India 

1989 Ayurveda certification: American Institute of Vedic Studies 
Founded the Swami Narayan Tlrtha Math (Hindu monastery) in the US 

1990 Published the book, Yoga Vani: Instructions for the Attainment of Siddhayoga 
Developed an Ayurvedic herbal product line 

1991 Began offering Ayurveda certification training programs internationally 
Received initiation as swami (monkhood) from his guru in India 
Advanced study with Ayurvedic doctors in the Himalayas 

1995 Published the book, Guru Bani: 100 Ways to Attain Peace 

1997 Created an Ayurvedic website 

1998 Wrote the Ayurveda Encyclopedia 

1999 Earned a Doctor of Science in Ayurvedic Medicine & Research: Westbrook University 

2000 Wrote the Ayurveda Primer: Introduction, Case Studies, & Research [E-Book CD-ROM] 
Research study published in American Ayurveda Journal 

Speaker: White House Commission on Alternative Medicine, John Hopkins U., Penn State U. 
Special advisor to the Ayurveda Acupuncture Board of Accreditation of Australia 
2002 Vastushastracharya certification: from All India Federation of Astrologers’ Societies 
2005 Began free online interactive Ayurveda education site 
Founded ISHTAA (International Spiritual Holistic 
Thinking Ayurveda Assn. - ishtaa.org) 

Swami Sada Shiva Tlrtha is listed in Natural Living 
Magazine’s “Best Alternative Health Practitioners in the 
Country ” guide, and his center has been listed as a respected 
Ayurveda resource in numerous holistic health magazines 
including Yoga Journal, natural Remedies, Delicious 
Magazine;and in various holistic reference books including 
the merican Holistic Health Association Complete Guide to 
Alternative Medicine. His website is in the top 3 most visited 
Ayurveda ites. The Ayurveda Encyclopedia remains in the 
internatonal top-10 bestselling Ayurveda books on 
amazon.com in the US, UK, Germany, Japan, and France. 

Author (left) with his Guru, 

His Holiness, Sri Sri Srimat 1008 
Swami Narayan Tlrthaji Maharaj 







The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 



Inspiration from Tagore 


God respects me when I work; but he loves me when I sing. 



Those who want to help knock at the door. 
Those who love find the door already open. 


I slept and dreamt life was joy. 

I awoke and saw life was service 
I served and lo, service was joy. 










Glossary 


Ayurvedic Glossary 


A 

abaran concealment energy of the causal or 
essential body 

abhyanga massage-like therapies 
agni digestive enzymes 
ahimsa non-violence 

ajapa the Gayatri mantra that brings salvation 
ajlma indigestion 

ajna chakra third eye or intuitive eye 
akasha space 
akshe-paka convulsions 

alajl a painful mouth emption emitting dischaige 
alasaka a digestive disorder 
alepa/atepanam medicated pastes for ulcers 
allaepauk ginger jam with additional spices 
alochaka Pitta one of the five Pitta subdoshas; 
resides in the retina of the eyes and governs 
sight. 

ama undigested food toxins 
amashaya stomach 
amla sour 

amlapitta acid gastritis 
anaha a digestive disorder involving ama 
and/or 

feces accumulation in the digestive tract 
anahata chakra fourth or heart chakra 
anasarca an edema-like swelling 
anguli/angula finger width measurement 
ani marma energy point governing muscle 
tension (located just above the knees) 
anjana eye salves 
anjana vidhi eye therapies 
anna lepa poultice used when pinda sweda is 
contraindicated or ineffective 
annamaya kosha food cell 
annavaha srota digestive system channels of 
transport 

antraja vriddhi inguinal hernia 
anupana a food medium or vehicle that 
transports herbs to the tissue levels (e.g., 
honey) 

anuvasana basti unctuous medicated enema 
ap water element 

apan Vayu one of the five Vayu subdoshas; 


downward moving air 

aparigraha not chasing after material wealth 
apartarpana reducing or detoxifying therapies 
apasmara epilepsy 
arbuda cancer 

ardha matsyendrasana alternate spinal twist 
yoga pose 

arishtha/asava medicated wines 
arochaka anorexia 
arogya health 
arshas hemorrhoids 
artavaha srota uterus channels 
asana hatha yoga postures 
asava, arishtha medicated wines 
ashaya containers within the body 
ashcotana therapy using eye drops 
ashtabindu eight drops 
Ashtanga Hridayam one of the three main 
ancient Ayurvedic texts 
asrigdara menorrhagia 
asthi bone tissue 
astivaha srota bone channels 
atlsara diarrhea 

Atreya author of Charak Samhita 
asthapana or niruha basti non-oily enema 
aum first sound of creation 
aupadravikam adhyayam eye diseases 
avagahan soaking in a tub of medicated water 
avalambaka Kapha one of the five Kapha 
subdoshas; found in the chest and creates 
cohesion, softness, moistness, and liquidity, 
which results in maintaining body strength, 
avaleha confections 

avaplda nasal therapy using fresh herb juices 
Ayurveda science of life and longevity 


B 

bahihpragna perceiving the world through 
the senses 

bahya kumbhaka outer breath retention 





The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


baikhari audible sounds produced by the throat 
bajra nadl first subtler channel in sushumna 
balamaya pratihedha children’s diseases 
bandhas energy locks used during yoga poses 
basmati rice a sweet, nutritious, and easily 
digested rice 

basti bladder or medicated enema- one of the five 
pancha karma therapies 

basti marma energy center below the navel; gov¬ 
erning apana Vayu, Kapha, urine function 
bhagandara fistula-in-ano 
bhagnam fractures 
bhajans singing of religious songs 
bhakti divine devotion resulting from experiencing 
the indescribable love of God 
bhasma burnt metals or gems (generally for 
ingesting) 

bhastra kumbhaka bellows breath exercise 
bhrajaka Pitta one of the five Pitta subdoshas; 
resides in the s ki n. It regulates complexion 
by keeping secretions from the sweat and 
sebaceous glands of the s ki n active, 
bhesan chick pea (also called garbanzo and 
channa 

bhramari kumbhaka humming-bee breath 
bhujangasana serpent pose 
bhujangini mudra breathing exercise for 
stomach diseases and digestion 
bhuta vidya Ayurvedic psychiatry 
bhutagnis five digestive enzymes that metabolize 
the five elements 

bhuta Vidya Ayurvedic psychiatry 
bidalika tonsil li tis 
blj seed 

bikshepa hallucination energy of the causal or 
essential body 
bindu semen or ovum 
bodhaka Kapha one of the five Kapha sub¬ 
doshas; found in the tongue and is responsible 
for taste. 

Brahma name of God of creation 
brahmacharya celibacy; one who follows a 
spiritual lifestyle including celibacy (certain 
religious married couples have their own form 

of brahmacharya) 

Brahman a name for eternal, unmanifest God 
brahmanadl subtlest channel in the sushumna 


brahmarandhra area in the crown chakra 
brahml gotu kola 

brahml ghee a rejuvenating herbal/ghee therapy 
with brahml as the main ingredient 
Brihat Samhita a Jyotish astrology text 
brimhana nourishing therapies in pancha karma 


C 

cala moving quality of food 
chai tea 

chaitanya consciousness 
chakra spiritual energy centers in the body 
chandrabheda pranayama left-nostril breathing 
exercise 

channa dal chick peas or garbanzo beans 
Charak pen name of author of Charak Samhita 
(Lord Atreya) 

Charak Samhita One of the three main ancient 
Ayurvedic texts 
chardi vomiting 

chitrini second subtlest channel in the sushumna 

choti ela small cardamom seeds 

churnas herb powders 

chyavan prash herbal rejuvenative jam with 

amalaki and ghee as its main ingredients 


D 

danta roga tooth disorders 
danta vidradhi dental abscess 
dantamula gums 
dardhya sturdiness 
deha-manasa psychosomatic 
dhamanl arteries 

dhanurasana bow pose (yoga posture) 
Dhanvantari divine father of Ayurveda 
dhara drava medicated oil for the head 
dhara karma certain pancha karma therapies 
dhara svedhana pouring warm oil on body, 
causing sweating 
dharana God-visualization 
dharma life purpose or life path; God-given 
talent 





Glossary 


dhatagnis seven digestive enzymes that 

metabolize the seven tissue layers; it includes 
anabolic and catabolic activity 
dhatu tissue 

dhuma medicated smoke therapy 
dhyana fixed God-visualization 
dosha humors; elemental or energetics related to 
personal constitution or current health 
imbalance (Vayu, Pitta, Kapha, Tridosha) 
draksha herbal wine 
drava liquid quality of food 
drava svedhana see dhara svedhana 
drishti eye 

drishti-gata-roga-vijnaniya eye pupil 

diseases 

G 

galaganda goiter 

Ganges famous river in India believed to 
believed to possess spiritual healing powers 
Gangotri a holy place near the source of the 
Garuda Purana ancient Vedic text that 
discusses gems 

Gayatri mantra mantra for salvation 
ghee clarified butter 
ghrita another word for ghee 
graham duodenum 

gomedha hessonite garnet used for healing in 
Ayurveda and Jyotish astrology 
gomukhasana cow-face yoga pose 
Goraksha Samhita a major hatha yoga treatise 
graham digestive disorders 
gridhrasl sciatica 
grishma summer 
gulma abdominal tumors 
guda (jaggery ) a form of pure cane sugar 
gunas three qualities or the fundamental laws of 
nature ( sattwa : creation, rajas: maintenance, 
tamas: dissolution) 

guru teacher; also heavy quality of foods 
guti herbal pills 

H 

halasana plough pose 

hang sah mantra sound of the life-breath 


hatha yoga gentle stretching exercises that 
improve health, mind/body coordination and 
spiritual foundations 
hataratnavali major hatha yoga treatise 
hemanta winter season 
hikka hiccup 
hima cold infusions 

hiranyagarbha Supreme God, golden egg, 
universal consciousness, or Supreme Self 
hirchula cardiac colic 
hridaya heart 
hridroga heart disease 

I 

ida left or lunar channel, associated with pingala; 
surrounding the sushumna 

J 

jaggery (guda) a form of pure cane sugar 
jalandhara bandha throat lock used with yoga 
postures to keep the bindu from flowing 
down-out of the head 
jara aging 

jatharagni digestive enzymes in the G.I. level 
jathara parivartanasana belly roll yoga pose 
jatrurdhva marma energy point group: those 
points on the neck and head 
jihwa roga tongue disorders 
jnyan mudra finger position to keep eneigy 
from flowing out of the fingers 
jwara fever 
Jyotish Vedic astrology 

K 

kaki mudra a breathing exercise- pursing lips 
and inhaling; cools Pitta (heat) 
kama healthy and spiritual use of the senses 
kamala roga jaundice 
kantha roga throat disorders 
kapalbhati kumbhaka frontal brain cleanse 
Kapha biological phlegm; water/earth 
energetic, constitution, or humor 
kapitthaparni a name for fran ki ncense 







The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


kapotasana pigeon yoga pose 
karana sharlra causal or essential body 
karma action 

karna purana ear bath therapy 
karnapall roga ear lobes 
karna-gata-roga-vijnaniya ear disorders 
karpur camphor 
kasa cough 
kashaya astringent 
kathina hard quality of food 
katti basti lower back bath therapy 
katu pungent 

kaumara bhritya pediatrics; one of the eight 
branches of Ayurvedic medicine 
kaya seka oil poured over the body (therapy) 
kayachikitsa internal medicine; one of the eight 
branches of Ayurvedic medicine 
kayvala kumbhaka automatic still breath exercise 
khara rough quality of food 
kichari grain/legume meal; usually basmati rice 
and mungdal. Sometimes some veggies are 
included 

kledaka Kapha one of the five Kapha subdoshas; 
found in the stomach, liquefying hard food 
masses. 

kosthagni digestive fire/enzymes 
kr im i parasites 
Kris hn a a name of God 
krishna-gata-roga-vijnaniya chorid and iris 
kriya yoga form of yoga exercises 
kshaya atrophy 

kukkutasana cockerel yoga pose 
kukshi-shiila a Vayu digestive disorder 
kumbhaka yogic breathing exercises 
kundalinl shakti spiritual life-force 
kurmasana tortoise yoga pose 
kushtha obstinate s ki n diseases 
kwatha herbal decoction 


laghu tight quality of food 
lalana chakra energy center in the palate 
langhana reducing therapies 
lavana salty 

laya yoga yoga stage where breathing stops 


lekhana scraping therapies lepa 
herbal paste or poultice 


M 

madat-yaya alcohol recovery 
madhayamanga marma energy point group: 

those points on the trunk of the body 
madhura sweet 
madhya medium (level) 
madhyama sound (nada) rising to the heart that 
is felt by the ears (but not heard) 
maha bandha great lock pose 
maha bheda yoga pose that brings life-breath 
into sushumna 

maha bheda mudra great piercing (yoga) position 
maha marma the 3 vital organs: head, heart, 
urinary bladder 

maha mudra great sealing pose 
Maharishi Kanada author of Nadlvijnanam 
Mahavlr Hanuman the Monkey-God; Lord of 
selfless service and devotion 
majja marrow/bones and joint tissue 
majjavaha srota marrow/joint lubrication 
channels 

mala waste produce (i.e., urine, sweat, feces) 
mamsa muscle tissue 
mamsavaha srota muscular channels 
manas chakra energy center slightly above the 
the 3rd eye on the forehead 
manda slow quality of food; also rice water 
mandagni Kapha-produced digestive enzymes 
manipura chakra energy center located at the 
navel 

manomaya kosha mind cell 
mantra special words or sounds for health and 
spiritual development 

mantra yoga meditation using words or sounds 
manya marma energy points in the neck 
governing lymphatic and Kapha function 
marga tracts in the body 
marma energy points on the body 
matsyasana fish pose 
matsyendrasana spinal twist 
medas fat/adipose tissue 
medovaha srota adipose/fat channels 





Glossary 


mutra urine 

mutravaha srota urinary channels 
mithya ahar vihar improper lifestyle 
moksha Self-Realization 
mridu soft quality of food 
mudras body and hand positions that channel 
energy into the chakras and sushumna 
mukha roga mouth cavity 
mula bandha perineum/cervix contraction used 
with yoga poses 

muladhara chakra energy center at the base of 
the spine 
murcha fainting 

murchha kumbhaka swooning breath exercise 

murdha taila head oil 
mutra urine 

mutra vriddhi scrotum fluid 
mutra-sharkara urinary gravel 
mutra-ashmari urinary stones 
mutra-ghata urinary diseases 
mutra-ghatadi urine retention 
mutra-krichra dysuria 
mutraghata urine obstmction 
mutravaha srota urinary channel 

N 

nabhi navel 

nabho mudra yoga exercise involving head 
extention and breathing 
nada sound 
nadl nerve channels 

nadl shodhana pranayama dual-nostril breathing 

exercise 

nadl sveda medicated herbal steam directed 
through a tube and applied to localized body 
areas 

nadlprakasham/nadlvijnanam pulse diagnosis 
nadl-vrana sinus 

nasikagra drishti eyes gazing at tip of nose 
nasya therapies applied through the nose; one of 
the five pancha karma therapies 

nasa-gata-roga-vijnaniya nose diseases 
nayana-bhighata-pratishedha externally 
caused eye injury 

nayana-budbuda eyeball diseases 


neti pot a small vessel that looks l ik e a miniature 
watering can; used for nasal channel washing 
netra basti medicated eye baths 
nidana diagnosis, etiology, cause of disease 
niketa abodes within the body 
nila marma energy points on the neck 
nirama non-clogged (no ama) digestive system 
nirbikalpa samadhi second stage of samcidhi 
(absorption in eternal consciousness) 
niruha basti oily enema 
nirvana shakti mother of the three worlds— 
experienced when crown chakra opens 
niyama ethical codes of conduct; purity, 
contentment, devotion, spiritual study, faith in 
God; included with Yama 

O 

odana soft, plain basmati rice meal 
ojas life sap; essence of immune system and 
spiritual energy 

P 

pachaka agni responsible for digestion 
pachaka Pitta one of the five Pitta subdoshas; 
the main digestive enzymes, they are found in 
the small intestine, stomach, and colon as 
non-liquid heat, bile, or digestive fire. The fire 
digests and transforms food, emulsifying food 
fats and separating absorbable nutrients from 
waste, so they may be passed to lacteals by 
absorption. 

padabhyanga foot massage 
padma lotus 

padmasana lotus yoga pose 
pancha karma five cleansing therapies; vaman, 
virechan, basti, nasya, rakta moksha 
panchang ephemeris 
panlr home made Indian ricotta cheese 
pantha passages within the body 
pandu-roga anemia 

para nada sound evolving from kundalinl at the 
first chakra 

parisheka medicated water sprinkled over 





The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


localized areas of the body for therapeutic 
benefits 

parshva-shula a form of colic 

paschimottanasana back stretching yoga pose 

pashasana chord yoga pose 
pasyanti sound only heard by advanced yogis 
Patanjali author of the Yoga Sutras and 
commentator on yama and niyama 
payasam semi-solid pudding for pinda sveda 
peya thin soup taken after pancha karma 
therapies 

phanta hot infusions 
plnasa rhinitis 

pinda sveda abhyanga therapy using a heated 
bolus 

pingala the right or solar nerve channel-related 
to ida; both surround the sushumna 
Pitta biological bile; fire energetic, a 
constitution, or humor 
pizhichil abhyanga therapy involving the 
continuous pouring of warm oil over the body 
prabhava special effects of herbs 
pradara menorrhagia 

pradhama herbal evacuative nasal therapy using 
pradhamana nasal therapy: herbs blown through a 
tube 

pradhana karma primary pancha karma practices 
pradhena non-absorbing topical pastes for Vayu 
and Kapha doshas 

prakriti one’s life constitution or nature 
pralaya universal sound sleep 
pralepa topical pastes for Pitta dosha 
prameha obstinate urinary diseases (including 
diabetes) 

prameha pidaka diabetic ulcer 
prana life force 

prana Vayu one of the five Vayu subdoshas; 
outward moving air. 

pranavaha srota channel which prana flows 
pranayam breathing exercises 
prasad food offered to God 
prasadana vision-clearing eye salves 
pratimarsha oil/uncting nasal therapy 
pratishyaya colds 

pratyahara withdrawal and liberation of the mind 
from the senses and objects (5th stage of yoga) 


pravahika dysentery 
pritivi earth 
puakusha gingivitis 
puja worship ritual 
punster male reproductive system 
purisha feces waste product 
purishavaha srota feces e li mination channels 
Purusha eternal, unmanifest consciousness 
purva karma preliminary pancha karma 
therapies (oleation & sudation) 
purvarupa hidden or incubatory signs of disease 
pushti nourishing 
puta-paka a group of eye therapies 

R 

rajas/rajasic law of nature that maintains life; 
one of the three gunas 

raja yoga final stage of yoga; one remains ever 
centered within their Self 
raja-yakshma pulmonary TB 
rakta blood 

raktaja gulma blood/ovarian tumors and cysts 
rakta moksha blood letting; one of the five 
pancha karma cleansing methods 
raktavaha srota blood circulatory channels 
ranjaka Pitta one if the five Pitta subdoshas; 
located in the stomach, liver, and spleen, and 
gives color to lymph chyle when it is 
transformed into blood as it passes through 
the liver and spleen. 

rasa plasma; taste; also products containing 
mercury ash 

rasavaha srota plasma channels 

rasa dhatu plasma tissue 

rasavahini capillaries 

rasayana rejuvenation 

Ravi Shankar renown sitar musician 

Rig Veda One of the four main Vedic scriptures 

Rig Veda Bhasyabhumika ancient Vedic scripture 

rishi seer or sage 

roga disease 

rudhrapushpa rose 

rukshana drying therapies in pancha karma 
rupa form; signs or symptoms of disease 





Glossary 


rusha dry quality of food 


S 

sadhaka Pitta one of the five Pitta subdoshas; 
found in the heart. It helps in performing 
mental functions such as knowledge, intelli¬ 
gence, and consciousness by maintaining 
rhythmic cardiac contractions, 
sadhana meditation 

sahasrara chakra energy center at the crown of 
head 

saibikalpa samadhi first stage of samadhi; 
sattwic mind 

salamba sarvangasana shoulder stand pose 
sama coated tongue due to ama in the digestive 
system 

Sama Veda one of the four main Vedic scriptures 
samadhi various stages of Self-Realization 
samagni normal digestion 
samana Vayu one of the five Vayu subdoshas; 

equalized moving air 
samnyasa coma 

samprapti pathogenesis; disease development 
samsarajana special diet after undergoing 
pancha karma therapies 

samshamana gentle reducing therapies for mild 
imbalances 

samashodhana strong reducing therapies for 
more serious imbalances 
samtarpana nourishing pancha karma therapies 
samvritasamvrita ducts within the body 
sanatana dharma fundamental Hindu 

philosophy that states everything has its use 
in its own time and place; so reject nothing 
and accept everything (in its time and place) 
sandhi mukti fractures 
sandhigata-roga-vijnaniya eyes 
sapta dhatus seven tissue layers 
Saraswati Goddess of wisdom, education, and 
music 

sandra solid quality of food 
sarva-gata-roga-abhishyandha conjunctivitis 
sarvanga dhara whole-body abhyanga therapies 
sarvanga senchana another name for kaya seka 


sattwa/sattwic purity; one of the three gunas 

sattwavajaya holistic psychotherapy 
setu bandha sarvangasana bridge yoga pose 
shakti spiritual energy 
shalabhasan locust pose 
shalakya tantra ears, nose, throat; one of the 
eight branches of Ayurvedic medicine 
shalya tantra surgery; one of the eight branches 
of Ayurvedic medicine 
shamana palliation therapy 
shambhavl mudra staring at 3rd eye exercise 
shankha marma energy point group on the legs 
and feet 

Shankar Sen author of Ncidlprakasham 
sharat autumn 

sharlrachidra spaces within the body 
shastra Vedic laws 
shatapatra lotus 
shavasana corpse pose 
sheka eye sprinkling therapy 
shiksha, diksha, parlksha learning, dedicated 
practice, evaluation 
shira veins 

shiro basti medicated oil soaking on the head 
shiro dhara warm oil flow to the forehead 
shiro lepa medicated head pastes or poultices 
shiro-roga-vi jnaniva head disorders 
shiro virechana nasya nasal evacuative 
therapies 

shishira cold season 

shishya disciple/student 

shltali cooling breath exercise 

shltkari kumbhaka hissing breath exercise 

Shiva one name of God in Hinduism 

shlakshna smooth quality of food 

shllpada elephantiasis 

shleshaka Kapha one of the five Kapha 

subdoshas; located in the bone joints and 
lubricates them. 

shodhana strong reducing therapies 
shopha/shotha edema 
shrama fatigue 

shuklagata-roga-vijnaniya sclerotic coat 
shukra dhatu reproductive tissue 
shukra-shmarl seminal stones 
shukravaha srota reproductive system channels 







The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


shiila colic 

shvasa breahing difficulty 

siddha yoni asana perfection pose (for women) 

siddhasana perfection pose (for men) 

simhasana lion yoga pose 

slta cold quality of food 

sneha medicated ghee and oil 

snehana oil therapy (external) 

snehapana internal oil therapy 

snighda oily quality of food 

soma spiritual nectar 

soma chakra between third eye and crown chakras 

srota channels or pores 

srutis Vedic laws 

stambhana astringent therapies 

sthana residence sites within the body 

stanyavaha srota breast milk channel 

sthira stable quality of food 

sthula large quality of food 

sthula sharira physical body 

sukshma subtle quality of food 

sukshma Sharira astral body 

surya the sun 

suryabheda pranayama solar breathing 
exercise 

suryasana sun salute yoga pose 
Sushrut author of Sushrut Samhita 
Sushrut Samhita one of the original three main 
Ayurvedic texts; mainly covers surgery 
sushumna spiritual tube within the spine. Life 
force energy rises through this tube 
sutratma thread of the Self; Universal Conscious¬ 
ness 

svara-bedha hoarsness 
svedhana preliminary pancha karma sweat 
therapy 

swabhavoparama recession by nature 
swadhishthan chakra second or navel energy 
center 

Swami Narayan Tirtha successor of Swam! 

Shankar Purushottam Tirtha 
Swami Shankar Purushottam Tirtha author of 
Yoga Vani & Guru Bani 
swapna sleep 
swarasa herb juice 

swastikasana auspicious pose (a yoga pose) 
swabhavoparama health returns from recession 


by nature, resulting from administering therapies 
swadus weet 
sweda sweat 

swedavaha srota sweat-transporting channels 


T 

tadan kriya great piercing (yoga) position 
taila seka another name for kaya seka 
talu vidradhi palatal abscesses 
talugata roga palate disorders 
tamas/tamasic one of the three gunas; lethargy 
destruction property 

tanmatras primal sensory energies before they 
develop into the five senses 
tarpaka Kapha one of the five Kapha 

subdoshas; found in the head and nourishes 
the sense organs. 

tapa svedhana heated object placed on body to 
cause sweating 

tapas a form of spiritual practice 
tarpaka Kapha subdosha that nourishes the 
senses 

tarpana soothing eye therapies 

tejas mental fire 

tekshna quick quality of food 

tikshna strong smoke therapies 

tlkshnagni Pitta-produced digestive enzymes 

tikta bitter 

til sesame seeds 

timira blindness 

tridosha/tridoshic a physical constitution 
involving all three closhas 
trishna thirst 

tur dal a legume high in protein 

U 

udakavaha srota water metabolism system 
udan Vayu one of the five Vayu subdoshas; 

upward moving air 
udara roga abdominal diseases 
uddlyana bandha exercise that contracts the 
lower abdomen 

udgharshana body powder mb 





Glossary 


ugrasana (paschimottanasana) back stretching 
pose 

ujjayl kumbhaka conquering breath exercise 
unmada insanity 
upajihvika glossitis 

upanaha svedhana hot poultice applied to body 
then wrapped in heated cloth 
Upanishads a series of Vedic scriptures 
upashaya diagnostic tests 
upaveda a secondary branch of the main Vedas 
uro basti chest/heart bath 
urustambha paraplegia 
ushma svedhana steam therapy 
ushna hot quality of food 
uttara karma pancha karma follow-up therapies 
uttara basti upper tract medicated enema 

V 

vaiswanara Consciousness in the universal mate¬ 
rial body 

vajikarana aphrodisiacs 
vajroll mudra thunderbolt yoga pose 
Vala a demon who when ki lled was cut into 
pieces that became various gems 
vamaka vamana herbs that induce vomiting 
vamana medicated emesis; one of the pancha 
karma cleansing processes 
vamanopaga vamana herbs that enhance 
vamaka herbs 

varnya lepa cosmetic plasters 
varsha rainy season 

vartmagata-roga-vijnaniya eyelids 
vasant spring 

Vastu Shastra Vedic architecture 
vata-rakta (also called vata-shonita) gout 
vata-shonita (vata-rakta) gout 
vata-vyadhi nervous system 
vatashthlla enlarged prostate 
Vayu/Vata biological wind; ether/air element, 
constitution, or humor (traditional word for 
Vata) 

Vedas The ancient scriptures of India 
Veda Vyasa ancient sage who transcribed the 
Vedas 

vidradhi abscess 

vignanamaya kosha knowledge cell 

vikriti current dosha imbalance (as differentiated 


from prakriti or life constitution) 
vilambika digestive disorder due to excess Vayu 
and Kapha 
vilepl thick rice soup 
vipaka post digestive taste 
vlrasana hero’s yoga pose 
virat consciousness in the universal physical 
body (also called vaiswanara) 
virechana medicated purgation; one of the 
pancha karma cleansing processes 
vlrya potency (related to the taste of herbs, foods, 
etc.) 

viryalpata impotence 
visasana alternate yoga pose for vlrasana 
vishada non-slimy quality of food 
vishagara-vairodh tantra toxicology; one of 
the eight branches of Ayurvedic medicine 
vishamagni Vayu-produced digestive enzymes 
Vishnu maintainer of the universe (one of the 
triad of Brahma , Vishnu, Maheshwara: creator, 
maintainer, and destroyer of the universe 
respectively); also One name of God in 
Hinduism 

vishuddha chakra 5th or throat energy center 
visuchika gastro enteritis 
viswa consciousness in the individual material 
body 

vrana wounds 
vriddhi enlarged scrotum 
vyan Vayu one of the five Vayu subdoshas; air 
movement throughout the body 
vyayama exercise 


Y 

Yajur Veda one of the four main Vedic texts 
yakrit janya raktalplata sickle cell anemia 
yama codes of ethical behavior non-envy, truth, 
non-stealing, continence, not desiring of 
material wealth (included with niyama) 
yoga uniting of mind and body, and the various 
subtle energies within; also a form of stretching 
postures (see hatha yoga) 

Yoga Vani an instructional book for the 

attainment of Siddhayoga (a guide to Self real¬ 
ization) 





The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


yoni mudra hand position to awaken raja yoga yusha rice and split yellow mung dal soup 
yonivyapat female reproductive 



























































Bibliography 


Bibliography 


Acharya PK. Encyclopedia of Hindu Architecture. 
New Delhi, India: Oriental Book Reprints 
Co.; 1979. 

Amber B. Pulse Diagnosis. Santa Fe, NM: 

Aurora Press; 1993. 

Badmaev V, Majeed M. Effects of Ayurvedic Herbs. 
Health Supplement Retailer Magazine. Novem¬ 
ber 1995. 

Badmaev V, Majeed M. Ayurvedic Adaptogens and 
Bioprotectants. Natural Food Merchandiser’s 
Nutrition Science News Magazine. September 

1995. 

Bhat MR. Brihat Samhita. New Delhi, India: 
Moltilal Banarsidass; 1986. 

Bhishagratna KL. (transl.) Sushrut Samhita. 
Varanasi, India: Chowkhambha Sanskrit Series; 
1991. 

Brala PM, Hagen RL. Effects of Sweetness 
Perception and Caloric Value of a Preload on 
Short Term Intake. Physiol Behav, 30: 1,1983 
January: 1-9. 

Colbom T., Dumanoski D., Myers JP. Our Stolen 
Future. New York, NY: Plume/Penguin; 1997 
Collinge W. The American Holistic Health 
Association Complete Guide to Alternative 
Medicine. New York, NY: Warner Books; 

1996. 

Dadd DL. Home Safe Home. New York, NY: 
Tarcher/Putnam; 1997 

Dagens B. (transl.) Mayamatma. New Delhi, 

India: Sitaram Bhartia Institute of Scientific 
Research; 1985. 

Dash B, Kashyap L. Diagnosis and Treatment of 
Diseases in Ayurveda, (vols. 2-7) New Delhi, 
India: Concept Publishing; 1981-87. 

Dash B. Massage Therapy in Ayurveda. New 
Delhi, India: Concept Publishing; 1992. 

Dash B, Kashyap L. Materia Medica of Ayurveda. 

New Delhi, India: Concept Publishing; 1987. 
Davis P. Aromatherapy A —Z. Essex, England 
C.W. Daniel Ltd.; 1988. 

Deshpande PJ, Singh R, Bhatt NS. Clinical Trial of 
Ayurvedic Drug U-144 (K4 Tablets) in Urinary 


Tract Infections. Medicine & Surgery. Vol 32, no 
10/11, Oct.-Nov. 1994. 

Deshpande PJ, Singh R, Bhatt NS. Clinical Effect 
of an Ayurvedic Drug L2002 on Hepatobiliary 
Disorders. Journal ofNIMA. Dec. 1994. 

Devaraj TL. The Pahchakarma Treatment of 
Ayurveda. Bangalore, India: Dhanwantari 
Oriental Publications; 1986. 

Dossey L. Healing Words. San Francisco, CA: 
Harper; 1993 

Fields D. Foods That Heal. New Age Journal 
July/August, 1993. 

Frawley D. Ayurveda Certification Course. Santa 
Fe, NM: American Institute of Vedic Studies; 
1992. 

Frawley D. Ayurvedic Healing. Salt Lake City, 

UT: Passage Press; 1989. 

Frawley D, Lad V. The Yoga of Herbs. Santa Fe, 
NM: Lotus Press; 1986. 

Gould KL, Ornish D., et. al. Improved Geometry 
by Quantitative Coronary Arteriography After 
Vigorous Risk Factor Modification. American 
Journal of Cardiology. Vol 69, 10 April 1, 1992: 
845 - 853 

Govindan S.V. Massage for Health and Healing. 
New Delhi, India: Abhinav Publications; 

1996 

Gray H. Gray’s Anatomy. Philadelphia, PA: 
Running Press; 1974. 

Grontved A, Hentzer E. Vertigo-reducing Effect of 
Ginger Root. A Controlled Clinical Study. ORL J. 
Otorhinolaryngol Relat. Spec., 48: 5, 1986: 282- 
6 . 

Gupta KRL. Science ofSphygmica or Sag Kanad 
on Pulse. Delhi, India: Sri Satguru 
Publications; 1987. 

Guyton A. Textbook of Medical Physiology. 
Philadelphia, PA: Saunders Co.; 1981. 

Heinerman J. Encyclopedia of Nuts, Berries and 
Seeds. West Nyack, NY: Parker Publishing; 

1995. 

India Currents Magazine. Stressed Out? Try Sitar 
Music. Dec ’95-Jan ’96: 14. 







The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Institute for Wholistic Education. Marina Point 
Therapy, [video] Twin Lakes, WI: 1989. 
Iyengar BKS. Light On Yoga. New York, NY: 
Shocken Books; 1976. 

Johari H. Ancient Indian Massage. New Delhi, 
India: Munshiram Manoharlal Publishers; 
1988. 

Johari H. Ayurvedic Massage. Rochester, VT: 

Healing Arts Press; 1996. 

Johari H. The Healing Cuisine. Rochester, VT: 

Healing Arts Press; 1994. 

Jordan S. Yoga For Pregnancy. New York, NY: 

St. Martin’s Press; 1987. 

Joshi SV. Ayurveda & Pahcha Kamia. Twin Lakes, 
WI: Lotus Press; 1997. 

Kumar AV. Principles of Ayurvedic Therapeutics. 

Delhi, India: Sri Satguru Publications; 1995. 
Kushi A, Esko W, Tiwari M. Diet for Natural 
Beauty. New York, NY: Japan Publications; 
1991. 

Lad, U & Vasant. Ayurvedic Cooking. 

Albuquerque, NM: Ayurvedic Press; 1994. 
Lad, V. Ayurveda; The Science of Self Healing. 

Santa Le, NM: Lotus Press; 1984. 

Lidell N, Rabinovitch N & G. Shivananda 
Companion To Yoga. New York, NY: Lireside 
Simon & Schuster; 1983. 

Murthy KRS. (transl.) Ashtanga Hridayam. 

Varanasi, India: Krishnadas Academy; 1991. 
Merck Manual. 16th ed. Merck Research Labor¬ 
atories: Rahway, NJ; 1992. 

Mindell E. The Vitamin Bible. New York, NY: 

Time Warner Books; 1991. 

Murthy SK. (transl.) Ashtanga Hridayam. 

Varanasi, India: Krishnadas Academy; 1991. 
Murthy SK. (transl.) Mcidhava Nidanam. 

Varanasi, India: Chowkhamba Orientalia; 
1993. 

Murthy SK. (transl.) Shangadhar Samhita. 
Varanasi, India: Chowkhamba Orientalia; 1984. 
Nadkami KN. Indian Materia Medica. Bombay, 
India: Popular Prakashan; 1993. 

Ornish D. et. al. Can Lifestyle Changes Reverse 
Coronary Heart Disease? Lancet. Vol 336, no 
8708,21 July: 129-133. 1990. 

Ornish D. Reversing Heart Disease Through Diet, 
Exercise, and Stress Management. Journal of the 


American Dietetic Association. Vol 91, no. 2, 
Lebruary, 1991: 162-165. 

Pal KNC. Effect of a Herbomineral compound on 
Diabetes. Ayurved Samachar Issue 8, vol 10, Leb- 
ruary 2 1988. 

Parikh, Pradhan PV, Shah LP, Bagadia VN. Evalua¬ 
tion of Indigenous Psychotropic Drugs - A 
Preliminary Study. Joum Res Ay Sid Vol 5, no 1- 
4, 1984. 

Patnaik, N. Garden of Life. New York, NY: 
Doubleday; 1993. 

Ranade S. Natural Healing Through Ayurveda. Salt 
Lake City, Utah: Passage Press; 1993. 

Rossbach S. Chinese Art of Placement. New 
York, NY: Penguin Books; 1983. 

Rossbach S. Interior Design. New York, NY: 
Penguin Books; 1987. 

Rossbach S. Living Color. New York, NY: 
Kodansha, America, Inc.; 1994. 

Sachs M. Ayurvedic Beauty Care. Twin Lakes, 

WI: Lotus Press; 1994. 

Saraswati Swami Muktlbodhandana (transl.) Hatha 
Yoga Pradlpika. Bihar, India: Bihar School of 
Yoga; 1985. 

Savnur HV. Ayurvedic Materia Medica. Delhi, 
India: Sri Satguru Publications; 1988. 

Shanmugasundaram ER, Rajeswari G, 

Baskaran K, Rajesh KBR, 

Shanmugasundaram K, Kizar AB. 

Use of Gymnema Sylvestre Leaf Extract in the 
Control of Blood Glucose in Insulin-Dependent 
Diabetes Mellitns. JEthnophannaacol 30: 3,1990 
Oct: 281-94. 

Sharadini U, DahanukarT. Ayurveda Revisited. 
Bombay, India: Popular Prakashan; 1993. 

Sharma RK, Dash B. (transl.) Charaka 
Samhita. Varanasi, India: Chowkhamba Sanskrit 
Series Office; 1992. 

Shastri AcharyaVaidyanath (transl.) Atharva Veda. 
New Delhi, India: Sarvadeshik Arya Pratinidhi 
Sabha. 

Shub HA, Salvati EP, Rubin RJ. Conservative 
Treatment of Anal Lissure: an Unselected, 
Retrospective and Continuous Study. Dis 
Colon Rectum 21: 8,1978 Nov-Dec: 582-3. 

Shukla DN. Vcistu Shdstra. New Delhi, India: 





Bibliography 


MunshiramManoharlalPub.; 1993. 

Sikdar JC. (transl.) Nadivijnanam and Nadipmk- 
asham Jaipur, India: Prakrit Bharti Academy; 
1988. 

Singh RH. Pane ha Karma Therapy. Varanasi, 
India: Chowkhhamba Sanskrit Series; 1992. 
Srivastava KC, Mustafa T. Ginger (Zingiber 
officinale) in Rheumatism and Musculoskeletal 
Disorders. Med Hypotheses 39: 4, 1992 
December: 342-8. 

Thakur M, Bhatt NS, Mishra S. others. Effect of 
Ayurvedic Drug (AB + R) in Indigestion. 
Medicine & Surgery. May - Aug. 1995: 25. 
Thome T. Tlwrne ’s Guide to Herbal Extracts 
(vol. 2). Royal Oak, MI: Wisteria Press; 

1994. 

Tirtha Swami Sada Shiva. Ayurveda Certificaton 
Program. Bayville, NY: Ayurveda Holistic 
Center Press; 1992. 

Tirtha Swami Shankar Purushottam. Guru Bani. 
Bayville, NY: Ayurveda Hohstic Center Press; 

1995. 


Tirtha Swami Shankar Purushottam. Yoga Vani. 
Bayville, NY: Ayurveda Hohstic Center Press; 
1990. 

Tisserand M. Aromatherapy for Women. 

Rochester, VT: Healing Arts Press; 1988. 
Tisserand R. Aromatherapy to Heal and Tend the 
Body. Santa Fe, NM: Lotus Press; 1988. 

Vasu RBSC. (transl.) Gheranda Satrihita. New 
Delhi, India: Oriental Books Reprint Corp.; 

1980. 

Werbach M, Murray M. Botanical Influences on 
Illness. Tarzana, CA: Third Line Press; 1994. 
Yoga Journal. Rx: Yoga. January/February 
1994: 14 

Wolever TM, Vuksan V, Eshuis H, Spadaora P, 
Peterson RD, Chao ES, Storey ML, Jen kin s DJ. 
Effect of Method of Administration of Psyllium 
on Glycemic Response and Carbo-hydrate Digest¬ 
ibility. JAm Coll Nutr 10:4,1991 August: 364-71. 
ZhouY, Xu R. Antioxidative Effect of Chinese Drugs. 
Chung Kuo Chung Yao Tsa Chih 17: 6,1997 June: 
373, backcover. 



iftt 






The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 



J MjdxrLcmljcjCLL § 7 It-IlLIlA- 









Index 


Index 


13 natural urges 31 
5 essential elements 347, 349 
5 Kaphas 17 

5 material elements 347, 349 
5 senses of knowledge 347 
5 Pittas 17 

5 Vayus 16 

6 Stages of disease development 41 
6 tastes 58 - 63,121 - 125 

herbs for 67 
nutrition 59 

physical and mental properties 68 
physiology of 62 
85 important Ayurvedic herbs 69 


A 

abaran 345 

ABC Stretch - office yoga 307 
abdomen/abdominal 156, 274 
colic and pain 157 
congestion 83 
diseases 369 

disorders 74, 85, 110, 139 
distention 31, 106, 196, 370 
enlarged 42, 170, 190 
fat 269 

muscles 263, 301-304 
organ protrusion 274 
organs 275, 277 

pain 31,41,70,76,109, 111, 132,149,155 - 
157,192,275 
lavan bhaskar 70 
pain and cramps 109 
spasm 41 

tumors 52, 99, 149, 154, 189, 494, 498 
walls 271 
weakness 31 
abhyanga 176, 207 - 247 
Kerala abhyanga 233 - 247 
abnormal growths 493 - 501 
abortifacient 91, 113 
abortion 85, 132 

abscess 82, 87 - 88,102,119,123,170,172,190, 


222, 246, 264, 326, 368, 401, 526,553 
dental 451 - 452, 533 
ear 429 

palatal 451, 533 
pulse 49 
s ki n 535 
throat 453 - 454 

absorption 106-107,138 - 139,146,148,156 
157 

of nutrients 84, 274, 276, 292, 294 - 295 
accumulation 41 
aches 237, 251 

waist, ribs, back, abdomen, or lower jaw 184 
achyranthes aspera linn. 73 
acid 34,41,72,122 - 124,131,133,138 - 139, 
323 

gastritic/gastritis 207, 379 
indigestion 84, 94, 366 
pulse 49 
rain/water 334 
stomach 130 

see also amino, antacid, hyperacidity, uric 
acne 74, 88, 132, 134, 137, 147, 231, 245 - 246, 
252 - 253, 326, 485,490 
aconitum felconeri stapf. 110 
aconitum hetrophyleum wall. 76 
acomus calamus linn. 107 
acrid 74, 96 

acupuncture 215 - 216, 556 
adaptability 328 

addiction 153 - 154, 176, 469 - 470 
adhatoda vasika nees. 109 
adhipati 217, 220 - 222, 224, 226, 228 - 230 
adipose tissue tearing 30 
adrenal 80,136,138,159,161, 207, 221, 267 - 
268, 336 
aduki141 

aegle marmelos corr. 79 
aerobics 174 

after taste: (vipaka) 20 
age 

five stages 33 
age reversal 35 
age/gender 128 
aggravation 41 





The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


aging 75,77,116,159,161,180, 207 - 209, 235 
264 - 266, 269, 286 - 288, 291 -294, 296 - 
297 

agitation 251, 280, 328 

agni 18, 34 - 35, 44, 58, 61, 82, 107,118, 121, 124, 
127 - 128,134,145 - 146,153,155 - 157, 
251, 269, 274, 314 - 315, 323, 327, 367, 
370, 372 - 374 
trikatu 70 

SEE ALSO digestion 
increasing 72 
nutrition 58 
suppressed 31 
ahimsa 342 

AIDS 75, 80, 87,103, 265, 328,528 
air purification 173, 250, 252 
ajapa 313 
ajlrna 

SEE indigestion 
ajna chakra 112, 259, 296, 316 - 
317 akarkara71 
akasha 348 
akshe-paka 

SEE convulsions 
alajl 534 

alasaka 186, 193, 376 
Albert Einstein 8 

alcohol 128, 131, 133, 142, 153,469 
alcohol addiction 

and snehana/oil therapy 176 
and comas 473 
recovery 144, 470 - 471 
therapies 470, 472 

alcoholism 75, 99,130 - 131, 135, 146, 246 
alepa/atepanam 237 
alertness 294 

and snehana/oil therapy 176 
alfalfa sprouts 134 
Ah Akbar Khan 318 - 319 
alimentary canal 268, 292 
alkali 171 
alkaline 140 
alkalinity 138 
alkaloids 152 
allaepauk71 
allergenic reactions 140 
allergic 134 


allergies 31, 84,134,136,141,157,186, 267 

respiratory 31 
dairy 146 

allium sativum linn. 100 

allopathic medicine, the development of 10 

almond 35, 143, 149 

alochaka Pitta 17 

aloe barbadensis mill. 92 

aloe vera (gel) 92 

alopecia 77 

alterative 73 - 74, 77, 79 - 80, 83, 85 87 - 88, 90 

- 97, 100 - 103, 107, 110 - 111, 113, 129 

- 130, 133 - 139, 141 - 142, 153, 156, 174 
female 95 

tonic 101 

alzheimer’s 192, 476 

ama 34 - 35, 44, 73, 79, 83, 89, 99 - 100, 102 - 
104,115,117 - 119,128 - 129,136 - 137,130 
- 156,170,172 - 173,176 - 177,180 - 181, 

185,187 - 188,192 - 193, 208, 210, 246, 314, 
353, 365, 368 369, 375, 377, 391 - 392 
andsvedha 180 
amalakl 62, 72 - 73, 125 
amashaya 35 
amavata 

SEE arthritis/rheumatism 

amenorrhea 80, 88, 92 - 93, 95, 98, 105, 192, 505 

amethyst 329 

amino acid 141, 207, 311 

amlpami 73 

amla-vetasa 73 

amlapitta/acid gastritis 379 

amlika 81 

amoebacidal parasites 110 
amoebicidal 113 
anabolic metabolism 16 
anaha 377 
anahata 290 
anahata chakra 317 
anal fissure 95 

analgesic 71, 77, 79, 85 - 87, 98, 107, 109, 113 
analeptic 104 
analysis chapter 37 

analyzing constitutions and diseases 39 
anandamaya kosha/delight cell 345 
anasarca 82 
Andrew Carnegie 10 





Index 


andropogon citratus DC. 78 
anemia 31, 49, 60, 70, 72, 75, 80, 82, 88, 93, 99, 
123,131 - 135,138 - 139,144,151,154,159, 
161, 274, 326, 328, 357 
anguli/angula 198, 204, 230, 234, 237 
anorexia 41, 59, 68,122,131,140,145 - 148 155, 
157,161,170,173,186,188,193, 200, 246, 363 
chyavan prash 70 
anesthesia 74 

anger 41, 44, 60 - 61,124, 250, 274, 280, 288 - 
290, 323, 338, 341,343 
pulse 49 

angina 74, 94, 155, 359 
angio-neurotic edema 440 
angiomas 441 
ani marma 216 
animal oil 148 
animal products 176 -148 
anise 155 

anjana/eye salve/anjana vidhi 243, 438, 440, 450 

an kl es 268, 460 

ankylo belpharon 441 

anna lepa 237 

annaja-Shula 379 

annamaya kosha/food cell 345 

annavaha srota 29 - 30 

anodyne 110,114 

anorexia 30 - 31, 59, 122,131, 140,145 - 148, 

155,157,161,171,173,186,188,193, 200, 
246, 363 

antacid 99,134 -135,145,153, 327 - 328, 379 
anterior staphyloma 443 

anthelmintic 73 - 74, 76, 79, 82, 88, 92, 94 - 100, 
108,110, 113 
anti-fat 90 
anti-fertility 138 
anti-oxident 150 
anti-poison 83 
anti-scorbutic 81 
anti-tumor 95, 137 
anti-Vayu 92 
antiallergenic 250 

antibacterial 76, 106 - 107, 113,118, 251 

antibilious 73, 79, 83, 989 

antibiotic 88, 113, 122,131,146 - 147,151 

antibodies 207 

anticarcinogenic 137 


anticough 149 
antidiabetic 110, 113 
antidiarrhea 113 
antidiarrhetic 82, 102 
antidotes (foods) 84, 166 
antidysenteric 102 
antiemetic 71, 85, 113 
antifungal 76, 96, 107 
antihistamines 207 
antioxidant 105, 136,138, 2461 
antiparasitic 74, 79, 81 - 82, 96 - 97, 100 - 111,132 
antiperiodic 76, 83, 86 - 87, 92, 95, 97, 110, 114 
antipoison 83 
antiphlogistic 110, 114 
antipyretic 77, 79, 95,110, 114 
antirheumatic 96, 107, 114 
antiseptic 70, 79, 82, 94, 97, 100, 106 - 107, 114, 
122,130,132,136,150,157 - 158 
antispasmodic 74, 78, 82 - 83, 87, 89, 93 - 94, 96, 
100,104,106 - 109, 114, 136,149,155 - 158 
antisyphilic 114 
antiviral 97,113, 135 

antraja vriddhi/inguinal hernia 493 ants 250 
anu taila (oil) 433, 552 
anupana 151 
anus 266 
prolapse 85 

anuvasana 169, 192 - 194 
anxiety 115, 117, 122, 123, 150, 155 - 157, 171, 
196, 201, 209,222 - 223, 250 - 251, 280, 289 
- 290, 314 - 315, 326, 338, 363,457 
anxious 127 
ap 346 - 348 
apamarga 73 

apan/apana 16, 250, 257, 260, 269, 282, 292, 294 

apana Vayu 34, 126 - 127, 315 

aparigraha 342 

apartarpana 169 

apasmara 

SEE epilepsy 

aperient 91 - 92, 100, 106, 114 
aphrodisiac 72, 75 - 77, 80, 83, 86, 91, 93, 94, 
96, 98, 100, 102 - 103, 105, 108 - 109, 

111, 114, 130, 135, 137, 140 - 146, 148, 

152 - 153, 156 - 157,327 - 329 
appendicitis 138 - 139 

^appetite 70-72, 79, 95 - 96, 101, 115, 119, 133 





The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


- 134, 136 - 139, 144 - 147, 155, 171, 178, 
182, 201,274, 287,321 
increases 71, 79, 96 
low 31, 41, 72 
pulse for loss of appetite 49 
appetizer 115 
apple 

baked, sour, juice, s ki n 129 - 130 
apple cider 152 
apricots 130 
arbuda 

SEE cancer 

ardha matsyendrasana 269 
ardrakam 71 

arjuna/arjuna myrobalan 74 
arka 74 

arms 271,273,306- 308 
arochaka 

SEE anorexia 
arogya 21 

aromas for Shamana/palliation 175 
aromatherapy 249 
3 doshas 251 - 252 
and chakras 253 

aromatic 71, 76, 79, 88 - 89, 92, 94, 96, 105, 

107, 115 
arrhythmia 30 
arshas 

SEE hemorrhoids 
artavaha 30 
arteries 31, 131, 208 
arteriosclerosis 30, 99,148, 161, 360 
yogaraj guggul 70 

arthritis 31, 42, 72, 77, 80, 87 - 88, 95, 97, 106 - 
107,130 - 131,133 - 139,141,149,155 - 
157,181 - 182,186,192,196, 208, 250 - 
251, 267, 272, 275, 287, 309, 323, 326, 545 
herb mixtures 70 
joints 108, 156 
Pitta and Kapha 136, 139 
rheumatoid 95 
snehana/oil therapy 176 
Vayu recipe 163 
artichoke 134 

artificial (foods & colors) 127 
asafoetida/hiiigwastak 72 
asanas 88, 257 - 311 


precautions for beginners 258 
asavas, arifihohas/medicated wines 153,473, 553 
ascites 99, 371 - 374 
asclepias curassavica, linn. 920 
ashaya 31 
ashcotana 243 
aShoka 75 
ashtabindu 20 
ashtanga hridayam 6 
aShwagandha 35, 75 
asparagus 135 

asparagus adscendens roxb. 103 
asparagus racemosus willd. 102 
asphaltum 103 
asrigdara 

SEE menorrhagia 
asthapana/niruha basti 192 - 196 
asthi 25 

asthivaha srota 29 - 30 

asthma 30 - 31, 42, 48, 70 - 72, 74 - 75, 77, 80 - 
81, 84, 88, 91 - 95, 99 - 100, 103 - 105, 
107, 108 - 110, 116 - 117, 130 - 132, 135 - 
136, 155 - 156, 185 - 186, 193, 202, 222 - 
223, 227, 238, 266 - 267, 272, 274 - 276, 
280 - 281, 285, 287, 328, 411 - 412 
bronchial 94, 188 
chyavan praSh 70 
pulse 49 

astral body 321, 343 - 344 
astral forces 328 

astringent 50, 58 - 63, 67 - 68, 72, 75 -86, 88 - 
90, 92 - 101, 104, 106 - 108, 110,115, 

122 - 125, 129- 158 
astrological 63 

astrological, gem therapies 324 
astrology (Vedic/Jyotish) 560 
athletes foot 252, 488 - 489 
atlsara 

SEE diarrhea 
ativisha 76 
atmagupta 91 
atmospheric conditions 40 
atonement 315 
atonic indigestion 73, 94 
Atreya 3 

atrophy 474-475 
aum mantra 313 - 317 





Index 


aupadravikam adhyayam 
SEE eye diseases 
aura 107, 129, 251, 321 
auspicious pose/swastikasana 258, 263 
auspiciousness 146, 153 
authoritative instruction 43 
automatic still breath/kayvala kumbhaka 290 
autonomic nerves 292 
autonomic nervous system 311 
autumn 40 

avagahan 181 - 182, 234 
avalambaka Kapha 17 
avaleha/confections 552 
avaplda 197, 199 - 212 
avocado 135, 149 
avipattikar churna 70 
awareness 89 
aym mantra 314, 316 
Ayurveda 3 
therapies 65 
analysis 37 

colleges and universities 8 


B 

babchi seeds 76 
babies 

chyavan praSh 70 
oranges 132 
see reproductive system 
back 273, 302 
bath 244 
lower 272, 277 
muscles 269 

pain 86, 107, 132, 272, 275, 299, 303, 307 
strain 298 
materia medic a 71 
upper - tension 303 
yogaraj guggul 70 
back bend yoga poses 271 
back stretching pose 258, 263 
bacon 148 
bacteria 89, 122 
bael fruit 79 
bahihpragna 348 
bahya kumbhaka 290 


baikhari 291 
bajra 316 
bakuchl 76 
bala 76 

balamaya pratihedha 

SEE children’s diseases 
balasmodendron myrrha nees 79 
balding 200, 235, 241 
balopacharaniya ahyaya 
SEE post-partum therapies 
balsamodendron mukul hook. 87 
bamboo manna 108 
bananas 130 

bandhas 260, 291, 260, 298, 582 

barberry 82 

barhal 62 

barley 139 

basil/tulsl 106, 250 

basmati rice 140 

basti 34, 169, 191 - 197, 228, 234, 244 
basti marma 228 
bath 78, 234, 244 
bathing 332 

bauhinia variegata linn. 90 
bay leaves 155 
bean sprouts 135 
beans 135 

beauty 234, 315, 328 
beauty care 245, 557 
eyes 560 
face 557 
s ki n 558 
bee stings 74 
beef 147 
beer 153 
beets 135 

belching 31, 72, 84, 170,172 - 173 
beleric myrobalan 78 
bell pepper 135 

bellows breath/bhastra kumbhaka 287 
belly roll/jathara parivartanasana 276 
berberis vulgaris linn. 82 
beta carotene 138 
bhringaraj 77 

bhagandara/fistula-in-ano 49,172,182,493 
Bhagavad Gita 342 

bhagnam/fractures 74,87,140, 406 - 407 





The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


bhajans318 
bhakti 112,614 
bhasma 327 - 328 
bhastra kumbhaka 287 
bhesan 235 
bhrajak Pitta 321 
bhrajaka 17 

bhramari kumbhaka 288 

bhujaiigasana/serpent pose 266 

bhujangini mudra 297 

bhuamalakl 78 

bhutrin 78 

bhuta vidya 7 

bhutagnis 18 

bibhltak! 78 

bidalika/tonsillitis 78, 110,197, 293, 533 
bij 70 

blja mantras 70, 313 
bikshepa 345 

bile 71,73-74,76, 82-83, 85, 95,106,115,119, 
124,131 - 133,135 - 136,142,150,155 - 
156,174,187,190 - 191,195, 286 - 287, 
309, 326 - 327, 375, 396 
promote secretion of 74 pulse 49 
bile flow 95 
bilious fever 92 

biliousness 72, 83 - 84, 99, 131, 133 
bilwa79 
oil 433 

bindu 264, 267, 269, 293 - 294 
SEE ALSO semen or ovum 
bites, rat and snake 99 

bitter 40,73,78 - 83, 86 - 87, 89 - 91,93 - 97, 99, 
101 - 107, 109- 116, 119 122- 124 
herbs 67 

physical and mental properites 68 
bitter melon 135 

bitter tonic 73, 82 - 83, 87, 92, 94 - 95, 97,101 

black creeper 101 

black magic 314 

black pepper 72, 95,156 

blackberries 133 

bladder 89, 94,115 - 116,130,132,136,138, 

195, 231,353 
see also gall bladder 
irritable 98 

urinary 115 - 116,130, 154,170, 192, 222, 


311,419-427 
inflammation 421 
pain 31, 421 

bleeding 30,72, 93, 95,108 -109,115,117 - 118, 
122,130 - 131,135,139 - 140,142,145 - 
147,150,153 - 156,158 - 159,169,181, 
186, 189, 222, 237, 328, 355 - 357 
chronic 146 
downward 186 
dysentery 75 
internal 73, 197 
lungs and stomach 130, 146 
pulse 48 
raktapitta 355 

see also gums, hemorrhoids, uterine 
blepharitis 440, 447 
blindness 190, 445 - 447 
blisters 157 
bloating 

distinction/chronic complications 41 
due to hemorrhoids 389 
upward-moving (apana), hingwastak 70 
blood 73 - 86, 89 - 102,104- 111,122, 129, 

131, 133 - 139, 140- 143, 145, 147- 
148, 150, 152 - 154, 156, 207, 209, 246, 
250 - 251, 274, 297, 321, 327, 355 - 362 
build 72, 136, 152 

circulation 95, 272, 287, 292, 294, 305 - 306, 
323, 329, 335 - 336 

cleanser 100,102,134,136,138,154,184, 
250 

clots 136 
coagulates 85 
derangement 237 

discharge from stomach and bowels 97 

flow 261 

flower 91 

glucose 140 

herbs 70 

high blood pressure 101, 235, 274 

in urine 421 

oxygenation 153, 287 

parasites 193 

purification95, 111, 170 

purifier 80, 82 - 83, 87 - 88,97,101,132,137, 

139, 260, 336 

purifier and detoxifier 97 





Index 


rebuild 72 

see also red blood cells 
stools 92, 96 
sugar 72, 138 
thinner 132 
tonic 92, 131 

toxic 42, 82, 100, 130, 147, 149, 235, 246 
tissue formation 88 
vessels 90, 92, 252 
white blood cells 70, 87, 90, 207 
blood pressure 83,130,132,136,138,149 - 150, 
208, 260, 280, 284, 286, 288 - 289, 310-311 
low/reduces 84, 96,136,138,149,156, 288 - 
289 

bloodletting/rakta mokSha 170, 172, 185, 202 
bloodstone coral 327 
bloodstream 176 
bloody stool, urine, and vomit 96 
blue sapphire 327 
blueberries 133 
bodhaka Kapha 17 
body powder rub 244 
body wastes (malas) 19 
boerhavia diffusa linn. 99 
boils 73, 85, 95 - 96, 98,113,134,190 
pulse 49 
bola 79, 250 
bolus 235, 237 

bones 25 - 29, 31, 33, 71 - 72, 74, 77, 82, 90, 95, 
103, 105, 122,143 - 144, 147 - 148, 150, 

159, 208 - 209, 212, 250 - 251, 264, 309, 

326, 336 

breaking/broken 30, 74, 95 
calcification 30 
cancer 30 
deficient 28 
elderly 33 

fractures 74, 87, 140, 406 - 407 
osteoporosis 28, 72 
pain 28 

rasayana (rejuvenative) 77, 100 

rebuild 72 

spurs 30 

tissue 244 

weak 28 

yogaraj guggul 70 
boron 143 


bound angle pose 

for pregnancy yoga 299 
bow pose/dhanurasana 267 
bowels 72, 85, 98,133,178 
bradycardia 171 
Brahma 317-318, 345 
brahmacharya 342 
brahman 3, 13, 284 
brahmanadl 316 
brahmarandhra 313 
brahml/gotu kola 80, 173, 331 
brahm! ghee 468 
brahm! rasayana 204 

brain 72,74,79, 80, 83, 88, 92,104,106 - 108, 
111 ,116,119,136,121,136,140- 141, 
143,145 - 146,150,158,161,198, 201, 
205, 207, 214, 233, 235, 238, 241, 243, 
251, 260 - 261, 265, 274, 281, 286 - 288, 
292 - 294, 305 - 306,309 - 310, 317, 323, 
326, 336,462, 543,547, 548, 
tumors 498 - 499, 501 
HBP 360 

nervous system 457 - 476 
obesity 389 
sight 446 

brass (cookware) 556 
Brazil nuts 143 
breast 136 
abscess 402 
feeding 513 
increase secretion 111 
increasing flow 102 - 103,157 
infections 250 
inflamed or diseased 92 
milk 30,122,141,146,153,186, 514 
no milk 30 
pain 30 

sore nipples 85 
stanyavaha 30 
swelling 30, 142 

breath/breathing 31, 107, 128, 158, 298, 328 
bad 158 

difficult 131,139,146,151 - 153,170,184,186, 
193, 246, 274,317, 411 - 412 
see also life-breath, kumbhaka, pranayama 
shallow/short 31,161 

&& 





The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


therapies 413,416 

yoga benefits 260, 263, 265, 274, 276, 
bridge pose/setu bandha sarvangasana 273 
Bright’s disease 94, 131 
with edema 86 
Brihat Samhita 324 
brihatl 80 

brimhana 169 - 170,172, 179,198 
broad bean 141 
broccol 135 
bronchial 100 

bronchial asthma 88, 94, 143, 411 
bronchitis 79 - 80, 87, 96 - 97, 99,105,107,109, 
111 - 112, 117,131, 136,145, 156, 210, 272, 
274, 287 
brown rice 140 
brown sugar 151 
bmise 88 

brushing teeth 331 
Brussels sprouts 135 
buckwheat 140 
bugs 584 

bumbusa arundinacia retz. 108 

burning 84,122, 130 - 131, 137,150, 152, 246, 

286, 487 
see also urine 

sensations 41, 92, 132, 237 
sitopaladi 70 
soles 488 

bums 88, 92, 140, 142, 145, 149 - 151, 246, 252 
poultice 105 
bursitis 92 
butter 145, 153 
butter milMassi 128 


C 

cabbage 135 
calamus (vacha) 107 
calcification 30, 208 
calcium 131, 134 - 143, 158, 162, 293 
deficiency 46,161 
calf muscles 300,302 

calm 105,141, 143 - 146,150, 152,156, 158,175, 
250 - 251, 260, 285, 305, 313 - 315, 321,323, 


327 - 328, 340, 359, 363,381,389 - 390,469, 
475 - 476 
calmative 115 
calories 138 
caltropis gigantea 74 
camphor 250 
camping 174 

cancer 9, 30,75,77, 87, 95,102 - 103, 106,130 
- 132,134 - 136,138 - 139,142 - 143,147, 
184, 250, 280, 287, 328, 499 - 501 
candida/yeast 34, 96, 131, 143, 147, 155, 390 
candle flame 208 
cane sugar 151 
canker sores 132 
canned foods 127,147 
canola 149,173 

snehana/oil therapy 176 
canscora decussata roem. 102 
cantaloupe 132 capillaries 31, 75 
caraway 156 

carbohydrates 34, 130, 135, 141 
carbon dioxide 136, 211, 281, 287 - 288, 292 
carbuncles 99, 190 
cardamom 84 
cardiac 70, 133, 246, 260 
colic 378 
edema 135 
pain 31 
plexus 270 
see also heart 
stimulant 115 
tonic 80, 98 
cardiovascular 131 
career 57 

carminative 71 - 72, 76, 78, 80, 83 - 84, 88 - 96, 
98, 100, 104 - 105, 107, 110,115, 155 - 
158 
carob 152 
carrots 136 
cashews 143 
cassia/cassia tora linn. 81 
castor oil 72, 85 , 149, 173 
cat’s-eye 327 - 328 
catabolic 16 

cataracts 190,198,208,240, 446 

catarrh 73,79, 81 - 82, 89, 95,98,132,139, 434 

cathartic 73, 85, 92,100,104, 115 





Index 


cattle 83 
cauliflower 135 

causal or essential body 344 - 345 

cause of all disease 39 - 40 

cayenne 156 

cedar 83, 250 - 253 

cedrus deodara 83 

celery 136 

celibacy 33, 271 

cells 288 

enzymatic and oxidation 293 
knowledge, mind and delight 348 
rebuild 72 
centipedes 109 

central nervous system 82,159 
cephalic 97 

cerebrospinal fluid 111,316 
cervical adenitis 186 
cervical glands 
enlarged 87 
cervix 298 
chai 154 

chaitanya 346, 348 
chakra marda 81 

chakras 88,176, 215, 228, 269, 271, 281, 283 - 
284, 290, 305,314-317 
and gems 325 
therapy 313 

chalazion cysts 440 - 441 
chamomile 156 

chandan (sandalwood) 111, 251 
chandrabheda pranayama 287 
channa dal/chick pea/garbanzo 129, 141 
channels/srotas and svedhana 180 
changer! 81 

Charak Samhita 6, 8, 31, 39 
chardi 

SEE vomiting 
charisma 289 
charity 33 
charm 328 
cheerfulness 141 
cheese 145 
chelates metals 130 
chemicals 147,186,581 
chemotherapy 75,77, 87,103 
cherries 130 


chest 185,269, 272,307 
ai lm ents 267 
burning 152 
pains 81 

chest expansion (modified fish pose) 
office yoga 306 
chest stretch 
pregnancy yoga 299 
chest/heart bath 244 
chickpea 141 
chicken 148 
child birth 509 
ceremonies 515 
difficult 81 

children 85,100,106,130 - 133,140 - 141,146 - 
149,151,153, 328,515,581 
colic, cramps, and diarrhea 157 
coughs and colds 89, 91 - 92 
laxative/purgative 83 
nerves and digestion 157 
newborn - colds and excess mucus 77 
planetary influences 518 
planetary therapies 519-522 
sleep & indigestion 158 
snehana/oil therapy 176 
thrush 131 
weakness 111 
worms 92 
yoga 304 
chi lies 136 
chill 156 
chin mudra 259 


Chinese cabbage 135 
chirayata 82 
chitrak 82 
chitrini 316 
chlorophyll 135 - 136 
chlorosis (in young girls) 80 
chocolate (and its substitute) 152 
cholagogue77, 111, 115 
cholera 79, 85, 94, 133, 146 - 147, 173 
cholesterol 70, 87,100,129,131 - 132,137,138, 
140, 143,145 - 150,159,161, 238, 311, 360 
- 361, 550 
hyper 87 

yogaraj guggul 70 
choline 140 





The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


chord pose 
SEE pashasana 
chorid 442 
choti ela 84 

chronic diseases 72,108 

chronic fatigue syndrome 143, 529 

chrysoberyl/cat’s-eye 328 

churnas/powders 552 

chyavan praSh 70 

chyle 15 -16, 35 

cigarette 133 

cilantro/coriander leaf 83, 136 
ciliary action 34 

cinnamon/cinnamomum cassia blume. 107, 156, 
252 

circulation 73 - 74, 88, 95, 107, 112, 122, 139, 141, 
153,155 - 157,159,180, 211, 235, 282, 287, 
292, 294, 302 - 305, 307, 309, 323, 326 - 
327,335 
svedhana 180 
yogaraj guggul 70 

circulatory 72, 74, 76 - 77, 79 - 81, 83 - 90, 92 - 97, 
99 - 102, 105 - 109, 112, 152, 214, 251, 307, 
315,355-362 
cirrhosis 77, 374 
cissampelos pareira linn. 94 
citrine 324 
clarified butter 
SEE ghee 

clarity 84, 86, 287, 295, 306 - 307 
clay cookware 556 

clothes 332 
clots 122 
cloves 72,156 
co-dependency 9 
coagulant 93 
cobalt 135 
cobra’s saffron 96 
coccygeal plexus 281 

cockerel pose/kukkutasana 271 
coconut 143, 149 
oil 173 

coffee 128,153 

detoxifies caffeine 84 
substitue81,198, 
cold extremities 96, 156 - 157 


cold infusions 551 

cold or painful extremities 76 

coldness in body 246 

colds 35,41,70 - 72,78 - 79, 84, 89,92 - 93, 96, 
99,100,106 - 108,111,131 - 132,136 - 
138,146 - 147,151,156 - 158,186,199, 

201, 250, 274, 287, 416 - 417 , 432, 435 
chronic 151 
juice 72 

colic 41,71 - 72,78 - 79, 81, 83, 85, 88, 91 - 92, 

94, 96 - 100,104,108 - 109,151,156 - 158, 
246, 377 
pulse 49 

colitis 70,72,78, 82,130,136,140,144,156,190, 
196, 222, 267, 274 
ulcerative 88, 95 

colon 16, 31, 34,72 - 73, 84,95,104,106,125, 

132,135 - 137,156, 250, 269 
inflamed or spastic 137 
inflammation 72 
yogaraj guggul 70 
pain 190 
perforation 30 
triphala 70 

color therapy 321 - 322 
for shamana/palliation 175 
coma 30, 107, 108, 473 
comatose 250 
commiphora mukul 87 
commiphora myrrha 79 
communication 315 
compassion 33,106, 147, 250 - 251 
complexion 77, 89, 111, 122, 136, 145, 153, 171, 
176, 195, 235, 241, 244, 246 
concentration 208, 294, 306 - 307 ,309 314, 317 
conception 91 -92, 506, 509 
condiments 148 - 150, 152 
confections 552 
confidence 274 
confusion 186 

congestion 106 - 107, 148 - 149, 156, 170, 251, 
274 

trikatu 70 
nasal 106-107 
sinus 106 

conjunctival cyst 440 

conjunctivitis 85, 92, 136, 243, 442 - 443, 444 





Index 


catarrhal and rheumatic 95 
conquering breath/ujjayl kumbhaka 289 
consciousness 315, 346, 348 
constipation 30 - 31, 34, 41, 70, 72 - 73, 79, 85 - 
89, 91 - 92,105,110,130 - 134,136,142 - 
144,146,149,150,170,173,182,184,190 
190, 192, 196, 261, 269, 272, 274, 287, 295, 
328, 382 

chronic 70, 79, 150 
pregnancy 252 
pulse 49 

snehana/oil therapy 176 
constitution 39 

consumption 108,131, 145 - 146, 246 
contentment 111, 315, 342 
contusions 74, 97 

convalescence 75, 97, 102, 130, 132, 135, 138 - 
141, 144- 151, 157 
from diarrhea 81, 84 
from fever 72, 77, 87, 95, 137 
from lung disease 133 
from febrile or infectious disease 142 
convulsions 30 - 31, 80, 89, 96, 104, 137, 155, 174, 
197, 458 - 461 
pulse 49 

cooking 105,127,150,163 - 165, 584 
using gas/wood 556 
cooling brcath/shltall kumbhaka 285 
copper 106,135,139, 556 
coptis teeta wall. 95 
coral 326 327 
corallium rubrum 99 
cordial 80, 115 

coriander/coriandrum sativum linn. 83 
coriander leaf/cilantro 136 
com 136, 140, 149 
com silk 140 

cornea 197, 437, 444, 446, 449 - 450 
fibers/opacities 81 
inflammation 243 
opacities/ulcers 101, 442 

corpse pose/shavasana 279, 301, 304 
correct posture/pregnancy yoga 298 
cortisone 267 

coryza 76,110, 197 - 198, 246,434 
therapies 416 
cosmetic plasters 246 


costus, kut root 94 
cottage cheese 145 

cough 30 - 31,71 - 72,74 - 76,79 - 81, 84, 86, 
88-94, 96- 100,102,104- 111,130- 134, 
138 - 139,143,145 - 146,149 - 153,155 - 
158, 170,181, 184,185, 202 - 204, 227, 250 
-251,285,328,409-411 
back 86 

chronic 91 - 92, 157 
chronic/children 92 
dry 133,145 - 146,150,155,157 
with fevers 149 
snehana/oil therapy 176 
dry and spasmodic 81 
juice 72 
nervous 104 
pulse 49 
therapies 416 
trikatu 70 
whooping 87,158 
coughing blood 327 
counseling 339 
country mallow 76 
courage 328 
cows 105 

increase milk 85 

cow’s face posegomukhasana/ 270 
cow’s mi lk 146, 153 
cowitch 91 
cramping 155, 157 

pain 109, 158 
therapies 463 
cranberries 130 
cream 145 

creativity 250, 263, 315, 328 
crocus sativus linn. 92 
Crohn’s disease 88 
cross-eye 243 
crown chakra 86, 313 
cry 31 

cucumber 137 
cumin 156 

curcuma longa linn. 87 

cutting hair 332 

cyperus rotundus linn. 96 

cystitis 77, 83, 86 - 87, 89, 94,103,112,141, 

421 cysts 138 





The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


in the armpit after fever 535 
ovarian/uterine 498 


D 

daily routine 35 
dairy 128, 144 
dandruff 550 

danta roga/tooth disorders 452 
danta-vidradhi/dental abscess 533 
dantamula roga 
SEE gums 
dardhya 209 
daruhaldJ/daruharidra 82 
dashamul 70, 91 - 92 
date sugar 151 
dates 130 
DDT 151 

de-obstruent 77 - 78,116 
deafness 31, 107, 242, 429 - 430 
pulse 49 

debility 75 - 76,79, 87, 91,95,103 - 104,108, 
110- 111,131,137- 138,140- 141,143 
- 145, 147 - 148,150 - 151, 154, 157, 327 
-328 

dashmul & chyavan praSh 70 
decline of Ayurveda 7 
decoction 105, 551 
decongestant 107,115 
degenerative diseases 328 
degenerative nervous disorders 315 
deha-manasa 39 
dehydration 136 
delight 315 
delight cell 345 
delirium 41, 71 - 72,104, 251 
delivery (childbirth) 182, 512 
discharge 108 
pains 133 
to facilitate 85 
dementia 274 

demulcent 77, 85, 89, 96,98,103,105 - 108,111, 
115,329 
dentifrice 116 
deobstruent 77 - 78,116 
depilatory 74 


depression 21 - 22,56,70,75, 80,93,106,115,152 
- 153,155, 250, 252,260 - 261, 275, 280, 
295, 321, 328, 380, 390, 394,466,474,499, 
504, 507 - 508, 545, 550, 561, 575 - 576, 
s kin depressions 485 
wound depressions 403 - 404 
dermatitis 112,132 
desire for warm things 41 
desires 317 
desserts 128 
detachment 250, 315 
detergents 581 

detoxification 70, 126, 131, 142, 315 
devadaru 83, 250 
deviated septum 432 
devitalized 154 

devotion 93,106,112,250 - 251, 

346 

DGL 111 
dhamanl 31 

dhanurasana/bow pose 267 

Dhanvantari 6 

dhyana 83 

dhara drava 241 

dhara karma 233 

dhara svedhana 181 

dharana 280 

dharma 57, 339 

dhatagnis 18 

dhatakl 84 

dhatri 73 

dhatus 18, 24 - 26, 32, 35,41 - 43,146,149 - 150, 
152,172, 178, 208 - 209, 234, 246 
SEE ALSO tissues 
dhuma 202 
dhyana 280 

diabetes 30 - 31,71 - 72, 78, 82 - 83, 86 - 88, 

97,101,103,109 - 110,115,131 - 137,140, 
146,150- 151,155,157,161,170,172, 235, 

238, 250, 263, 267, 269, 272, 328, 423 - 424 
Kapha recipe 165 
mellitus 87,185 
pulse 49 

therapies 425 - 426 
triphala70 

diabetic ulcer 426 - 427 





Index 


diagnostic tests (upashaya) 39 
diamond 327 - 328 

diaphoretic 71 -72, 74, 76, 78, 81, 83 - 84, 90, 96, 
99,101,106- 107,116,174 
diaphragm 272, 292 

diarrhea 71, 73 - 74, 76, 78 - 79, 81 - 85, 88 - 90, 

93 - 96, 98,102 - 103,107, 111, 113,122, 
129 - 133,136 - 139,142,145 - 147 - 148, 
151,153 - 154,156 - 158,170 - 171,173, 
178,180,184 - 185,190,192, 246, 365 
chronic 79, 101 
pulse 49 

chronic, obstinate mucus and catarrhal 79 
infantile 85 

remittent and intermittent 83 
triphala 70 

difficult breathing 75, 86 
digestion 29 - 30, 71, 73 - 74, 81 - 82, 84, 87 - 
88, 95, 128, 131 - 132, 136, 140, 145 - 
147, 151 159, 170, 208, 235, 246, 264, 
266, 268 - 269, 274, 288 - 289, 295, 297, 

309, 314, 317, 321, 335, 363 - 391 
SEE ALSO agni 

poor/low 31, 111 
irregular 41 

digestive 31, 71 - 74, 76 - 81, 83 - 100, 102, 104, 
106 - 107, 109 - 113, 122, 130 - 133, 135, 
139, 263, 268, 274, 283, 285, 293, 308 - 

310 , 363 - 392 

digestive enzymes 34 - 35, 92 
digestive fire 18, 34 - 35, 136, 145, 269 
SEE ALSO agni 
digestive organs 
soothes 108 

digestive stimulant 79, 84, 89, 131, 145 - 147, 
152,155,172- 173,175 
digestive system 15, 73, 112, 363 
digestive-tract infections 147 
digestives 116 
dill 157 

dioscoreabulbiferalinn. 109 
discharges 87 
discutient 97 
disease 39 
cause 21 

development (6 stages) 41 
disinfectant 100,116, 131 


distention 31, 41, 158, 192 
triphala 70 
distilled water 154 

diuretic 73, 76 - 78, 80, 83, 86 89 - 95, 97 - 99, 
101 - 103, 105 - 107, 109 -111, 116, 122, 
130 - 141, 145, 149 - 150, 153 - 154, 156, 
158 

diverticulitis 30, 137 
Divine light 316 
Divine love 289 
Divinity 33, 39 
dizziness 136, 146, 153, 201 
DNA 134 

dosha marma 223 - 229 
dogs, parasites 100 
dopamine beta hydroxylase 207 
doshas 14, 23, 34, 39, 40, 42 - 43 
abhynanga pressure 209 
mantras 315 
personalities 340 
questionnaire & self-test 52 
douche/urethral basti 197 
draksha 153 
drava svedhana 181 
dreams 251, 314 
dried catkins 98 
drink 31 
drishti 208 

drishti-gata-roga-vijnaniya 
SEE eye pupil diseases 
drooping shoulders 267 
dropsy 289 
drowsiness 97 

drug addiction therapies 470 
drugs 142, 470 
drunkenness 157 
dry 31, 41, 170 

snehana/oil therapy 176 
dry mouth/skin 131 
dual doshas 62, 125 
duck 148 

ductless glands 274 
ducts 31 
dugdha 246 
dullness 148 
dulse 138 

duodenal catarrh 73 







The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


duodenum 34 - 35, 85, 154, 365, 367, 549, 577 
ulcers 83, 89 
durba 93 

dvivraniya/inflammed ulcers 405 
dysentery 73 - 79, 81, 83 - 85, 89 - 90,92 - 96, 

98,101 - 102,105,109,130,132 - 133, 
137, 141, 157,190, 365 
amoebic 79 
bleeding 96 
chronic 79, 81, 89 
pulse 49 

with bloody stools 92 

dysmenorrhea 80, 92 - 93, 95 - 96, 104 - 105, 157 
503 , 506,508 
neuralgic 78 
pulse 49 

dyspepsia 78, 81, 98 - 99, 156 - 157, 375 
dysuria 81, 103, 170, 246, 419 


E 

ear 92, 97, 100, 156, 159, 186, 200 - 202, 241 - 
242, 274, 285,331,429-431 
earache 77, 104, 198, 202, 242, 252, 429 - 430 
lobe 430-431 
pus/malodor 430 
ringing 201, 242 
ringing/noise 429 
oil 242 

easy bridge pose/postpartum asanas 303, 
eat 31 

eclipta alba hasskAeclipta erecta linn. 77 
eczema 80, 97, 132, 135, 149, 159, 161, 185, 246 
edema 31,74,78 - 79, 81, 86 - 88, 90 - 91, 94 - 95, 
99 - 100, 103 - 104,107, 111, 116,122,129 - 
131,134 - 141,145,153 - 155,157,159, 

180,186,193,198, 200, 207, 209, 237, 243, 
246, 250, 531 - 533 , 534 
pulse 49 
therapies 532 
eggplant 137 
eggs 147 - 148 
ego 343 

eight branches of Ayurveda 6-7 
ejaculate 31 


ekanga dhara 234 
ela/cardamom 84 
elasticity 268 

elatarria cardamomum maton 84 

elderly 75,144,146,150,153,157,176 - 177, 

187,199,210 
yoga 308 - 309 
electrochemical balance 207 
electromagnetic field 208 
elements: building blocks of life 13 
elephantiasis 75, 80, 91, 101, 494 
elimination 109, 208, 268 
emaciated 170, 199 

emaciation 75, 77,108, 111, 123, 134- 135, 145 
- 147, 152,156, 246 
embelia ribes burm. 110 
emblic myrobalan/emblica officinalis 72 
embryology 509 
emerald 324, 327 - 329 
emesis 34, 152 
see vamana 

emetic 74, 77, 90, 92, 99, 106 - 107, 111, 116, 122, 
156-157 

emmenagogue 78 - 79, 92 - 93, 95 - 97, 105, 

108, 111, 116, 136, 150, 157,329 
emollient 89, 97, 102, 105, 117, 135, 137, 140, 
143, 145, 149, 151, 178, 183 
emotions 61, 73, 136 - 137, 139, 141, 144, 158, 
201, 244, 250 - 251, 261, 281, 314 - 315, 
321, 323 - 324, 327 - 328, 331, 337 - 339 
emphysema 136, 274 
empowering herbs 70 
emptiness 198, 201 

endocrine 15, 268 - 269, 274, 287, 289, 293, 
296,311,323,548 
endometriosis 505 
endometritis 87, 505 
yogaraj guggul 70 
endurance 147 

enema/basti 34, 85, 151, 191 - 196 , 228 
energizing herbs 316 

energy 60,107,131 - 132,138,140 - 141,143 - 
144 , 147,150 - 153,156,159,172,178, 204, 
207, 210, 212, 215, 228, 240 
& color therapy 321 - 323,328 
& gem therapy 324,326 
& mantras 313, 315-316 





Index 


& mudras/bhandas 291 - 292 
& office yoga 296, 305, 307 - 308 
& pranayama/kumbhaka 281 - 282, 284, 286 
& yoga 259 - 260, 262, 265, 270 - 271, 273 
-274 
enlarged 

liver and spleen 30, 70, 371 - 372, 374 
prostate 98, 149, 238, 524 
mahasudarshan 70 
enteritis 81, 130 
enthusiasm 315 
entropion 441 

environmental factors 33, 337, 581 - 582 
envy 250 

enzymes 18, 34 - 35, 126 - 127, 207 
digestive 92 
EPA 582 
epiglottis 186 

epilepsy 71, 80, 88 - 89, 92, 99,102 - 104,107, 
109,149,186,192,196 - 201, 220, 224, 
274, 468 - 469 
and cough 109 
seizures 156 
epispastic 117 
epsom salt 73 
epstein barr 103, 265, 529 
equilibrium 260 

eragrostis cynosuriodes beauv. 93 

eranda 85 

errhine 117 

emptions, s ki n 81 

erysipelas 110, 156 

erythema 110 

esophagus 34 

essential oils 176 

estrogen 109, 294, 581 
eternal 39 

eternal consciousness 346 
ethics 341 
etiology 39 - 40 
eucalyptus, aromatherapy 250 
euphorbia neriifolia linn. 104 
evacuating nasya/shiro-vircchana 198 
evacuation 331 

excretory 31, 71 - 73, 79 - 81, 84 - 85, 88 - 90, 
92,94, 96, 99 - 101,104 - 106,110- 111, 


271,282-283,315,317,332 
exercise 173 - 174, 208, 354 
exhaustion 75, 77, 104, 146, 152, 154, 246, 335 
-336 

exhilarant 117 
exorcism 155 

expectorant 34, 71, 73 - 74, 79, 81, 84, 87 - 88, 90 - 
92, 94 - 98,100,104,107 - 109, 111, 117, 
122,174 

foods 131 - 132,134,137 - 138,143,149,151, 
155-157 

external injuries 83 

external causes of dosha increase 18 

extracts 553 

eye 31,70,72,75,79, 82, 84 - 85, 88, 92, 97, 99, 
102, 112,119, 150,159, 170,172, 174, 176, 
190, 208 - 209, 238, 241, 243 - 245, 251, 283, 
286,288, 437 - 450 
bath/netra basti 243 - 244 
bleeding/buming 243 
discharges 202 
drops 243, 449 

foods for 131,135 - 136,145,148,151,153, 
155, 

injury (external cause) 450 
itching 243 

joint and binding membrane 439 

lashes 441 

lustre 243 

observation 45 

pain 203, 243, 285 paste 72 

pulse 49 

pupil diseases 445 
redness 243 

salve 104, 243,449 -451,466 
sliminess 243 
snehana/oil therapy 176 
sticky 201 
sunken 243 
swelling 444 
tearing 243 
therapy 243 
wash 83, 331 

eyeball diseases 437- 439 

eyelid disorders 71, 105,197, 440 - 442 





The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


F 

face 44, 197, 288 
abhyanga 245 
pain, numbness 31 
paralysis 77, 91, 145 

fainting 41, 72, 137, 150, 154, 170, 246, 473 
pulse 49 

faith 106, 250, 338, 342 

fat 27 - 30,73 - 75,78, 82 - 83, 86 - 87, 90, 92, 94 - 
95, 97 - 99,104,106 - 107, 111, 122,131, 
134, 139, 142,144 - 145, 147 - 148, 151 - 
152,156,161,172,180 - 181,190,194 - 
195, 205, 208 - 209, 219, 222, 250, 277, 285 
see also obesity 

fatigue 31, 41, 75, 202, 207 - 208, 252 
fatty acids 143 
favabean 141 

fear 17, 19 - 22, 24 - 26, 29, 41, 49, 60 - 61, 174, 
201, 209, 280, 310, 314, 317, 319, 332, 338, 
340-341,343 
pulse 49 

febrifuge/febrile disease 79 - 80, 82 - 83, 87, 91, 

92, 97, 99,101,106,108,117, 
convalescence 142 
foods 130,132,135,137,142 - 144, 
feces 19, 28 - 30, 35,49, 61, 68,122,190,192, 
194- 195,208,211,226 
soften/lubricate passage 85 
suppression pulse 49 
feet 245, 252 

burning sensations 242 
burning soles 461 

female disorders 159, 200, 

hormones/organ debility 75, 102, 142, 222, 

283,289,294 

reproductive 82, 85, 88, 96 - 99, 106, 109, 116, 
251,270, 327, 503-509 
snehana/oil therapy 176, 246 
See also reproductive, pituitary, endocrine, 
hormone, pineal 
Feng Shui 564 
fennel 73, 157 
fenugreek 157 

fertility 148,156, 263,267, 315, 326 - 327 
fertilizer 583 


fetus 75,103 

fever 31, 41,70, 72 - 74, 76 - 92, 94 -102, 105 - 
106,108 - 110,113 - 119,122 - 123, 393 
-400 

aromatherapy 250 - 251 
brain 72 

chakras 316 - 317 
chronic 77, 81, 102, 146, 153, 190 
convalescence 72, 87, 95, 97 
deep seated and intermittent 77 
foods 130 - 133,135 - 139,142,145 -147, 
149,151 - 153,155-156,158- 159 
gastric irritability 133 
gem therapy 328 
intermittent/remittent 79 - 83, 95 
intermittent or malarial 133 
pancha karma 170,172 - 173, 174, 185 - 186, 
188,190,192, 246 
pulse 49 

pranayama/mudra 286, 297 
teething 81 
tridoshic 199 

fiber 130, 132, 134 - 135,137 - 138, 142 - 143 
fibroids (uterine/ovarian) 75, 505, 507 
figs 130 

filariasis 186, 494 
filberts 143 

finger contraction 184, 461 
finger nails- observation 45 - 46 
fish 148 

fish pose/matsyasana 275 
fistula-in-ano 49, 172, 182, 493 
five elements 13, 70 

five kinds of dosha development 39-40 
five leafed chaste tree 97 
five life-breaths 343 

five senses of action and knowledge 343 
flat bean 141 

flatulence 31,71 - 72, 83, 89, 99 
flax seed oil, snehana/oil therapy 176 
flax seeds 143,149 
fleas 108 -109 
flesh 237 

flexibility 307 - 308 
flies 109,250,584 
flora 147 
flour 144 





Index 


flower gardening 174 

flu 70, 85,96,100,106- 107,109, 111, 131,137 - 
138,147,156- 158 
Kapha-type 33 
fluorescent lights 321 
fluoride 138 
fomentation 171, 180 
food 174 
allergies 381 
assimilation 93 
aversion 198 
cell 345 

combinations 127 
improper quantity 41 
intake and dosha illness 41 
plans for doshas 587 
poisoning 190 
quality and quantity 127 
fractures 70, 74, 87, 140, 406 - 407 
frame of mind 127 
fran ki ncense 250 - 252 

frontal brain cleanse/kapalbhati kumbhaka 287 

frozen foods 127 

frozen yogurt 146 

fruit 129 fruit juices 

153 fruit sugar 151 

fumigation 

toothache 91, 92 
fungus 110 


G 

galactagogue 85,102 - 103, 105, 111, 117 
galaganda/goiter 133, 185, 197, 533 
gallbladder 95,115 - 116,129 - 130,133,135, 
138,190, 260-261,311 
pulse 51 
recipe 164 

stones 95,103,118,130 - 131,133,136 - 139, 
190,353, 375 
gandusha 451 
Ganges/Ganga 103 
Gangotri 103 
gangrene 135 

garbanzo/chick peas 129,141 


garcinia 111 
garden nightshade 89 
gardenia 250 - 251 

gargle 70 - 71, 79 - 80, 88 , 90, 131,133, 152, 

156, 331,451 

sore mouth or spongy, ulcerated gums 88 
garlic 99 

Garuda Purana 326 

gas 34,41,70,78 - 79, 81 - 82, 88 , 90, 94 - 96, 

100, 104, 107, 110, 115, 122,124, 131, 

135, 141, 144, 150, 154 - 158, 176, 192, 

219, 222, 224 - 225, 246, 268, 275, 292 
gastric ailments 83, 89, 96, 116, 133, 207 
juices 119,121,152 

gastritis 72, 89, 96, 108, 130, 144, 277, 379 
gastroenteritis 186, 367 
gastrointestinal disorders 266, 276 
gastrointestinal tract 155, 176 
gauri 87 
gauriphal 85 
Gayatrl mantra 313 
gems 324 - 329 
genital tract displacement 506 
pain 197 
genics 581, 583 
gentleness 63 

germicide/germifuge 81, 107, 117 

ghee 71 - 72, 81, 95 - 96,104,127 - 128,130, 

132,137 - 140,143, 145 - 146 , 150 - 151, 
153,155,163 - 167,170,173 - 174,176, 

179, 258, 285, 309, 333 - 334 
lamp 104, 321 

pancha karma 181 - 183, 187 - 188, 190, 192 - 
193,196 - 198,200 - 205,208,234,236 - 237, 
243 - 246 

shamana/palliation 174 
snehana/snehapana/oil therapy 176 - 178 
Gherand Samhita 257 
ghrita 

SEE ghee 

g.i. tract 79, 127,176,131,135,172, 176,180, 
184,212, 276,310-311,390 
disorders 73,78 - 79,93,104,131,180 
giddiness 41,99,208,242,246 
gigantic swallowort74 
ginger 71 - 73, 250 







The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


gingivitis 533 
ginseng 75, 575 

glands 130 - 131,140, 265, 267 - 271, 274, 283, 
292-293, 296,311 
adrenal and thyroid 138 
definitions 547 - 548 
enlarged 92,197 
neck enlargement 90, 98 
swollen 30,75,77, 86, 98,104,158,193, 328, 
390,495 
glass ingested 85 
glaucoma 243, 443 - 444 
glossitis - acute superficial 533 
glucose 207 
glucoside 108 
gluten 141 

glycyzrrhiza glabra linn. Ill 

gnats 250 

goat’s head 86 

goat’s milk 146, 153 

goiter 70,133,185,193,197, 533 - 534 

gokshura 86 

gold thread 95 

gomedha/hessonite garnet 328 

gomukhasana/cow face pose 270 

gonorrhea 78, 89 - 92, 97, 99,105,112,133,137, 

524 

epididymitis and orchitits 97 
pulse 49 
good conduct 35 
Goraksha Samhita, 257 
gotu kola/brahm! 80, 173 
gout 70,72,81,85-87, 90, 99,110,130- 131, 
133- 136,139,141,144,157,170,190, 
192- 193, 202, 231,235,535 
pulse 49 
goyabean 141 
graham 

SEE digestive disorders 
grains 139 
granthi 287 

hard, small, benign tumors 534 
granular conjunctivitis 440 
grape juice 131 
grape sugar 151 
grapefruit 131 
grapes 131 


grass 93 

Graves’ disease 534 

gray hair 72, 77, 94, 123,161, 197 - 200, 208, 
235, 241 - 242, 274, 296 
great lock pose/maha bandha 264, 295 
great sealing pose/maha mudra 264, 294 - 295 
greed 201, 280 
green tourmaline 324 
gridhrasl 

SEE sciatica 
grief 170, 317 
gripe 72 
griping 79, 83 
gnshma 40 

groin stretch/pregnancy yoga 298 

grounding 315 

guava 131 

guda/jaggery 151 

gudmar 23, 86 

guduchl 86 

guggul 70, 87, 251 

gulma/abdominal tumors 99, 154, 189, 494 
gums 70, 87 - 88, 131, 133, 242, 252, 452 
bleeding 72,78,129, 132 - 133,159,161 
spong/bleeding 78, 80 
swollen or bleeding 131 
gunas13, 20 

guru 11, 126,314,318, 346 
guru mantras 313 
guru-Shishya 8 
guti and vati/pills 552 
gymnema sylvestre 86 
gynecological 152, 251, 503 


H 

hair 72, 76 - 78, 92, 97, 111,144, 150, 159, 202, 
213-215, 222, 240, 332 
balding/loss 31,77, 80,159,161, 202, 242 
dryness 241 facial 246 

gray 31, 72, 77, 94, 105, 123, 161, 197, 208, 
274, 296 

graying and falling out 197-201, 242, 331 
growth 92,105,150,159 
wash 94, 97,105 
halasana/plough 274 





Index 


hammantra315 
hamstring 300,302 
hand cramps 275 
handicapped yoga 308 
hang sah mantra 313, 317 
Hanuman 265 

Hatha yoga 174, 257 - 310 , 582 
SEE ALSO yoga 
Hatha Yoga Pradlpika 257 
happiness 274, 315 

happiness and unhappiness cause of health and 
disease... 39 
haridra 87 
harltak! 88 
harmonizing 329 
harmony 322 
Hataratnavali 257 
hate/hatred 250, 274, 280 
hay fever 84, 136, 158 
hazelnut 143 

head 41, 95, 170, 172, 186,195, 197 - 200, 202- 
203, 238 - 242, 250, 273, 315, 543 
head/neck stretches - office yoga 305 
headache 31,72,77,79, 81 - 82, 84 - 85, 88 - 89, 
93, 98 - 99,106 - 108,110,113 - 114,136, 
138,154 - 158,181,197 - 198, 201 - 202, 
240, 242, 249 - 252, 261 - 263, 274, 276, 
285,416, 545 
pulse 49 
health 7, 315 

health, excess & deficiencies of the dhatus 24 
healthy pulse 49 
hearing 101, 197, 202, 208, 245 
heart 72, 74, 77, 79, 82, 88 - 90, 92, 95, 99 - 100, 
106- 108,110- 111,115,117,122- 123, 

125,130 - 133,135 - 137,139 - 141,143, 
148,150,152,155 - 156,158 - 159,164 - 
165,170,174 - 175,186,188,195, 202 - 
203, 205, 207 - 209, 212, 216, 218, 221 - 
222, 228, 231, 244, 249-251 -251, 253, 
268, 270 - 272, 281 - 283, 287, 289, 290 - 
292,309, 313, 315,317 - 318, 323, 326 - 
328, 328,542 

disease 31,72,74, 77, 90,94, 98,170,173, 
184,186,359 

pulse 49 


heaviness 41 

spiritual heart 315, 338,342 - 344, 347 
stimulant 76, 86 
tendons 16 

heartburn 34,70, 85, 90, 131,135, 144 
pregnancy 252 

heat 34, 83, 85,114,116 - 118,128,131 - 132 
137,150,154,174 - 175,180 - 184,187, 
227, 287, 293, 332 - 336, 342, 
heat stroke 142 
heaviness 41,170, 173, 184 
hemanta 40 
hematemesis 101 
hematuria 90, 421 
hemicrania 97, 198, 202 
hemiplegia 71, 101, 183,192,460 
hemoglobin 29 - 30, 35 
hemorrhage, internal 84 
pulse 49 

hemorrhoids 42, 70, 72 - 76, 79, 81, 82, 84 - 88, 
90, 92 - 93, 96 - 100,103 - 105,108 - 110, 
119,130,132 - 134,138,140 - 141,145, 
153,156,180,182,186,189, 222, 246, 
252, 264 - 265, 267, 274,384 
bleeding 74 - 75, 84, 88, 90, 93, 96,105 
pulse 49 

hemostatic 72 - 74, 77, 79, 93, 95, 107 - 108, 
117,130- 131,133- 134,137 
hepatic tonic 77 

hepatitis 70,72,77, 88, 92, 95,136, 374 

herbology chapter 67 

herbs 

exercise 336 
juice 551 
mixing 553 

preparation and use 551 
teas 153 

tonics for shamana/palliation 174 
traditional mixtures 70 
hernia 70,149, 157, 274 
hiatal 30 
inguinal 493 
pulse 49 

hero’s pose/vlrasana 265,300 
herpes 70, 84, 92,95,102,123,130,134 - 135, 
146, 153, 170, 172, 186 
genital 524 





The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


zoster 112,186, 486 
hessonite garnet 328 
hiatal hernia 30 

hiccup 31,42, 88, 94,107,151,155 - 156,184, 
199, 202, 285, 412 - 413 
pulse 49 
hidden stages 41 

high blood pressure 101, 212, 360 
SEE ALSO hypertension hik es 174 
hikka 

SEE hiccup 

hima/cold infusions 551 

Himalayan cedar 83 

hirigwastak 70 

hip 277, 300, 302 

hlra bhasma 328 

hiranyagarbha 348 

hirchula/cardiac colic 378 

hissing breath/Shltkari kumbhaka 289 

histaminase 207 

HIV 528 

hives 245 

hoarseness 71, 84, 88,131, 133,157, 184,197, 
201, 416, 435 

pulse 49 
holistic 14, 39 

holy basil/tulsl 106, 250-251 
home suggestions 337, 583 
homogenized 144, 146 
honey 127, 151 
and ghee 151 

honeysuckle 251 
hoom mantra 314-316 
hordeolum cyst 440 

hormones 102,147, 159, 207, 212, 215, 246, 252, 
260, 269, 274, 283, 294, 311, 328, 581 - 582 
deficiency 109, 207 
female-regeneration 75 
increases 109 

secretions 109, 270, 274, 286, 289, 293, 296 
swelling 70 
horseradish 157 
horses 83 
hot infusions 551 
hot peppers 136 
hot temper 209 
hot tubs 173 


hridaya 228 
hridroga 

SEE heart disease 
hrim mantra 315 

humming bee breath/bhramarl kumbhaka 288 
humor-imbalancing priorities 33 
humus 141 
hunched back 267 

hundred husbands herb/shatavarl 102 

hunger 50,93,146,153 

hydragogue 90 

hydrocele 493 

hydrochloric acid 152 

hydrocotyle asiatica linn. 80 

hyperacidity 70, 102, 128, 133, 135 - 136, 154, 

159, 285, 327 - 328, 379 
hyperactivity 250, 321, 323, 327 
hypertension 100- 101, 111, 123, 130, 133 - 134, 
139, 144, 159, 202, 252, 266 - 267, 274, 

326, 360 

SEE ALSO high blood pressure 
hyperthyroidism 390, 534 , 548 
hypochondria 79, 80, 102, 138 
hypoglycemia 130, 135, 143, 146, 161 
hypotension/low blood pressure 152 - 153, 361 
hypothalamus 281, 310 
hypothyroid 534 , 548 
hysterectomy 508 

hysteria 88,93,100,104,107,109,155 - 156,198, 
250, 280, 327 
pulse 50 


I 

ice bean 146 

ichnocarpus fmitescens 101 
ida 257 - 258, 260, 265, 280, 283, 286 - 287, 291, 
293 -295,316-317 
illusion 328, 346 
imagination 315 

immune system 35,70,75 - 76, 80, 87,99,103,106, 
137,144, 147,149 - 151,161, 207 - 209, 215, 
251, 265, 287, 309, 314, 527 - 529 
impatience 209 

impotence 30,76, 86, 91, 93,100 - 102, 109,134, 
148,156 - 157, 328, 523 





Index 


abhyanga 210 
tonic 327 

infections 83, 85, 88 , 92, 95,124,130,135 - 139, 
142 - 144, 147, 151 - 152, 154,159, 161, 
207, 209, 250 - 251, 321, 323, 326, 328, 

393 - 407 

infectious disease 142 - 144 
inference 43 - 44 

infertility 86 , 91, 93,102, 109, 134, 143, 263, 267 
inflamed bowels 85 

inflammation 30, 70, 76 - 81, 83, 85 - 86 , 88 , - 
90, 97, 99,100, 111, 129,131,133,143- 
111,156, 250, 267, 293, 321, 326, 336 
breast 92, 252 
colon 72, 137 
ear 180 

eyes 150, 202, 208, 243 
external 78 - 79, 81, 92, 97, 114,133, 143, 
incompatible foods 41 
incontinence 72, 110,157, 197, 427 
incubatory stages 41 
independence 327 
Indian alces 92 
Indian atees 76 
Indian bedellium 87 
Indian gall nut 88 
Indian gooseberry 72 
Indian madder 95 
Indian nightshade 80 
Indian pennywort 80 
Indian spikenard 89 
Indian summer 40 
Indian valerian 104 

indigestion 41, 70 - 73, 76, 79 - 80, 82 - 84, 87 - 
88 , 91, 94 - 96, 105, 107, 110, 123, 126, 
128, 131, 136, 141, 144 -145, 155 - 158, 
161, 166, 170, 186, 246, 264, 269, 285 - 
286, 301, 375 - 377 
atonic 88 , 95 
bilious 133 
children 158 
chronic, 95 
pulse 50 

pregnancy (yoga posture for) 30 
individual consciousness 348 
infants 130 
abhyanga 210 


tonic 327 

infections 83, 85, 88, 92, 95,124, 130,135 - 
139, 142 - 144, 147, 151 - 152, 154, 159, 
161, 207, 209, 250 - 251, 321, 323, 326, 
328, 393 - 407 
infectious disease 142 - 144 
inference 43 - 44 

infertility 86, 91, 93, 102, 109, 134, 143, 263, 
267 

inflamed bowels 85 

inflammation 30, 70, 76 - 81, 83, 85 - 86, 88, - 
90, 97, 99, 100, 111, 129,131, 133, 143- 
111, 156, 250, 267, 293, 321, 326, 336 
breast 92, 252 
colon 72, 137 
ear 180 

eyes 150, 202, 208, 243 
external 78 - 79, 81, 92, 97, 114, 133, 143, 
156,237 
gall bladder 95 
genital 99 
internal 99 
joints 97, 142 
kidney 94, 102 
lungs 102 

mucus membranes 85, 110 
muscles and joints 97 
nerve 76, 157 
reduces 77 
skin 92, 95, 149, 246 
stomach 72 
swellings 90, 157, 237 
inflammatory bowel syndrome 88 
injuries 80, 83, 95, 130, 146, 149, 152 - 153, 156 
pain 156 
swellings 92 
SEE ALSO wounds 
inositol 135 

insanity 77, 80, 101 - 103, 107, 109, 145, 153, 
186, 199-200,317,465-468 
pulse 50 

insecticidal 94, 97, 108 - 109, 156, 250 
insects 108, 583 - 584 

bites/stings 74, 88, 102, 131, 133, 251 
repellent 109, 156, 250 
insight 327 

insomnia 31,41,70, 75,92, 99,102, 104,123, 







The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


130,140,150,156 - 157,159,161,170, 
176, 196, 207, 222, 233, 235, 238, 240, 

250 - 251, 266, 272, 274, 280, 289, 314 
instinct 293 
intellect 177, 202, 343 

intelligence 88,129,145 - 146, 152 - 153, 177, 
195, 220, 246,315,328 
intermittent fevers 74 
internal organs 144 
internal stye 440 

intestinal 30, 110, 130, 180, 195 - 196, 214, 218, 
222, 271,277, 281,378-379 
bleeding 129 
catarrh 132 
cleansing 72 
colic 99 

disorders 79, 83, 85,137 - 140,159,173,193, 
276 
flora 88 
flu 85 

large intestine 149, 190 
SEE ALSO colon 
mucus membrane 78, 110 
muscle sedative - promote secretion of 74 
obstruction 371 - 372, 374 
organism 89 

parasites 186, 190,193, 382 
perforation 30, 371 - 373, 374 
problems 89 

SEE ALSO small intestine 
SEE ALSO ulcers 
spasms 82,151 
tonic 79 
tract 138 

worms 92, 135, 138 
intoxication 41, 81, 246 
intuition 287 - 288, 290 - 291, 339 
iodine 139, 161 - 162 
ipomoea digitata linn. 110 
iris 250-251,442 

iron 99, 106,130 - 131,134 - 141, 158,161 - 162, 
cookware 556 
irradiated 155 

irritability 185,132 -133,141,159, 250-251, 274 

irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) See colitis 
irritant 75,118,141, 


irritation 85,141,148,274 
Ehabgol 88 

isometrics/office yoga 305 
ispaghula 89 

itching 78, 81, 85, 88, 94,123,159, 203, 237, 244 
161,180 


J 

jade 324, 327 
jaggery/guda 151 
jal jamnl 94 

jalandhara bandha 260, 293 
jam 71 

jatamansh! 89 
jara 208 
jasmine 250 
jatharagni 18 

jathara parivartanasana 276 
jatrurdhva marma 216 

jaundice 73,78 - 79, 83, 85, 87 - 89, 92, 94 - 95, 
97, 99,103,131,133,136,140,184,190, 
328,375 
pulse 50 

jaw 197, 200, 202, 242 
jealousy 250 
jerusalem artichoke 134 
jihwa roga/tongue disorders 453 
jnyan mudra 259 - 261 
jogging 174 

joints 42, 70, 76 - 77, 104, 116, 142, 197, 207 - 
208, 211 - 213, 215 - 216, 218 - 219, 222, 
226, 230 - 231, 235, 244, 250, 276 
arthritic 108, 141, 156 
SEE ALSO arthritis 
dislocation 
SEE fractures 
gout/rheumatic 90 
heaviness 149 

inflammation/swelling 97,142 
pain 81 - 82, 85, 95,108,170,179,182,184 
pain/swelling 157 
stiffness/swelling 102,235 joy 
84,250,274,315,322 
juice 84,154 


jwara 





Index 


SEE fever 

Jyotish 3, 322, 324 - 325, 560 


K 

kakamachl 89 
kaki mudra/shltall 297 
kaknasha 90 kale 136 
kama 57 
kamala 100 
kamala roga 
SEE jaundice 
kanchanar 90 
kanchanar guggul 90 
kantha roga 

SEE throat disorders 
kantkarl 91 

kapalbhati kumbhaka/frontal brain cleanse 287 
Kapha 14, 16 - 17, 22, 31, 34, 41, 70 - 72, 76, 
79, 83 - 84, 87, 94 - 95, 99 - 100,105,108 
-109, 111, 146 
kapikachhu 91 
kapitthapami 250 
kapotasana/pigeon pose 271 
katuka 92 

karana shanra/causal or essential body 344 
karela 135 
karma 147 

karmic 33, 282,314, 344 
kama purana 242 
kamapall roga 
SEE ear lobes 
kama-gata-roga-vijnaniya 
SEE ear disorders 
karpur 250 
kasa 

SEE cough 
katti basti 244 
kaumara bhritya 7 
kaya seka 234 - 235 
kayachikitsa 6 
kayvala kumbhaka 290 
kcsharaja 77 
kefir 146 
kelp 138 


Kerala 233 

keratitis (xerotic) 442 

khadir 507 
khlr 74 

kichan 63,141 - 142,188 

kidney 77 - 78, 85 - 86, 89, 91 - 92, 94 - 95, 99, 

101 - 103,106 - 107,125,130 - 132,136, 
138 - 139,141,143,145,148 - 150,196, 
205, 222, 250 - 251, 260 - 261, 268, 271 - 
272, 327 - 328 
bleeding 131 
calcium deposits 46 
derangement 31 
infections 70, 87 

stones 83, 86, 89, 95, 99,103,131,133 - 136, 
138- 139,153,190 
kidney beans 142, 166 
king of the bitters 82 
king of the oils 149 
king of the purgatives 85 
king of Vayu disorders 85 
kledaka Kapha 17, 34 
kl! m mantra 315 

knee-to-chest/postpartum asanas 303 

knees 107, 304,460 

knowledge cell 345 

kosthagni 35 

krim mantra 315 

krirni 

SEE parasites 
Krishna 106 

krishna-gata- roga-vijnaniya/chorid and iris 442 
krishnamul 106 
kriya yoga 294 
ksham315 

kshay a/atrophy 474-475 
kuSha 93 

kukkutasana/cockerel 271 
kukshi-Shula 378 
kum kuma 93 
kumari 92 

kumbhaka 284 - 285 

kundalinl 262, 266, 269, 271, 287, 290 - 291, 
293,314 

kundalinl Shakti 23,260,265,313 
kurmasana/tortoise 270 





The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


kushtha/skin diseases (obstinate) 479 
kushtha/ kut root 94 
kutaj ill 
kuzu 138 

kwatha/decoctions 551 


L 

labor contractions/pain 107, 252, 512 

lactation 132, 252 

lactose 151 

lagophthalmos 441 

laghu patha 94 

lalana chakra 317 

lam mantra 315 

lamb 148 

langhana 169,172 

lard 148 

large intestines 149 
SEE ALSO colon 

laryngitis 71 - 72,79, 99,108, 111, 138,156,198, 
252, 454 
lashuna 100 

lassi /butter milk 128 - 129, 145 
lassitude 263 - 264 
lavan bhaskar 70 
lavender 250 

laxative 72 - 73,76 - 77,79, 81, 83, 88 - 90,92, 
99,105, 111, 118,122,130- 133,135 - 
138, 140, 143 - 146, 148 - 154, 157 
laya yoga 285 
la z iness 41 
leaches 152 
lecithin 140 
legs 301 - 302, 307 
legumes 141 

lekhana/scraping 243, 449 
lemon 71,131 
lemon grass 78 
lentils 142 

lepas/plasters 87, 98,110,141, 237,246 - 247 
leprosy 75,94,110 
lethargy 122,155, 201, 207, 209, 290 
lettuce 137 

leukoderma 76,161,185,483 

leukorrhea 76 - 77, 84, 87 - 88,91,93, 97,102 - 


103,133,137,143 - 144, 508 
liberation 267 
licorice 73, 111 
life cell 345 
life purpose 9 
life sap 19, 23, 35 , 122 
SEE ALSO ojas 

life-breath 280 - 282, 290, 316-317 

life-force 284, 287, 321 

lifestyle 40, 175, 331 

ligament stretching 88 

light headedness 31, 42 

lightening therapies 169 

lily 250 - 251 

lima beans 142 

li me 131 

linseed 143,149 

lion pose 258, 262 

lips 30, 46, 149, 452 

liqueurs 153 

liquids 152, 246 

liquor 153 

lithotriptic 79, 86 , 94 - 95, 98,103, 116,118 
liver 34 - 35, 70, 72 - 73, 76 - 80, 83 - 85, 88 , 95 
- 99,104,106 - 108,125,130 - 136, 138 - 
142, 145, 147 - 150, 152 - 153,157, 159, 
190, 202, 205, 211, 250 - 251, 260 - 261, 
268 - 269, 271, 276 - 277, 286, 288, 326 - 
327,329, 336, 374,581 
enlarged 30, 70, 74, 81 - 82, 85, 90, 92 - 93, 
111, 131,133 
pulse 51 
recipe 164 

lockjaw 197, 242, 460, 463 
locust poseAhalabhasana 266 
long pepper 98 

longevity 35, 73, 80, 88 , 137, 146, 153, 157, 207 
-208, 234, 267, 281,286,317 
longing 346 
loss of appetite 101 
loss of faith in the Divine 40 
loss of sensation 101 
lotus 250-251,258,260 
lotus seeds 143 

love 93,103,106,147,250-251 
love and emotions 337 
low blood pressure 156, 361 





Index 


lower back 76,156 

lower back stretch office yoga 307 

lumbago 70, 75, 78, 85 - 87, 93,130, 269, 275 

lumbar stiffness 246 

lunar breathing 174, 287 

lunar channel 286 

lungs 30, 34,70, 84,102,106,108, 111, 125,130 - 
131,135 - 138,143 - 146,149 - 151,153, 

156 - 158, 205, 214, 218 - 219, 221 - 222, 
225, 229, 250 - 251, 276, 287 - 289, 309, 328 
calcium deposits 46 
SEE ALSO respiratory system; asthma 
pulse 51 
lust 201 
luster 234 

lymph 70,76,79, 90,100,134 - 135,137 - 140, 
142, 144, 158, 207, 211 - 213, 250 
cancer 30 
chyle - tendons 16 
obstruction 30 
lysine 140 


M 

macadamia 143 
madan 62 

madat-y ay a/alcohol recovery 144, 470-473 
madhayamanga marma 216 madhura 35 
madhya 202 
madhyama 291 

magnesium 135 - 139, 141 - 144, 161 - 162 

maha bandha/great lock pose 264, 295 

maha bedha 264, 296 

maha marma/vital organs 228, 541 

maha mudra/great sealing pose 264, 294 - 295 

mahanarayan oil 173,176, 208,251, 546 

mahasudarshan 70 

Maharishi Kanada 46 

Mahavlr/Hanuman 265 

majjavaha srota 25, 27 - 30 

malabarnut 109 

malabsorption 31, 70, 74, 88, 96, 145, 147, 158, 
266,367, 380 

SEE ALSO sprue malaise 31,41 
malaria 82 - 83, 86 - 87, 90, 92, 94, 97, 131, 400 
malas 18-20, 176 


male reproductive system 522 
malefic planets and constellations 41 
mallotus philippinensis muell, arg. 100 
malnutrition and edema 141 
malt syrup/maltose 151 
mamlra 94 

mamsavaha srota 27 - 30 
manas chakra 317 
manda188 
mandagni 18, 375 
mandarin 134 
manganese 133,135,138 
mango 71,132 
manikya bhasma 327 
manipura chakra 269, 317 
manjishtha 95 

manomaya kosha/mind cell 345 

mantra 70, 313-315 

mantra yoga 285 

manya 228 

maple sugar 151 

maple syrup 150 

marga 31 

margarine 149 

maricha 95 

benign and malignant 95 
marijuana 108 
marjoram 157 
marma 6, 176, 215 - 232 
marrow 25, 27 - 31, 42, 75, 77, 80, 84, 86, 89, 91 
92, 95 - 97, 99,101,104,106 - 108,142 - 
145, 147 - 148 
massage 149 - 150, 173 

SEE ALSO abhyanga masses 70, 151 
mastitis 30, 142, 252 
materia medica 7,71 
matsyasana/fish pose 275 
matsyendrasana/spinal twist 268 
maya 328, 345 

mayonnaise 152 meat & fish 147 
medas 25 

medovaha srota 27 - 30 
medical definitions 310 
medicinal plasters 237 

meditation 33, 57,112, 126,136,143 - 144,174, 
250-251,296,313-314,319 





The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


meibomian gland infection 440 
melancholy 79,88,107 
melia azadirachta linn. 97 
melons 132 

memory 72, 75, 77, 80, 88 , 96, 100, 102, 106 - 
107,143,145 - 146,153,159,161,176 - 
177, 208, 241, 243, 281,290, 294 
meningitis 533 

menopause 80, 92 - 93, 95 - 96,102,106, 508 
spasms 104 

menorrhagia 75, 78, 84, 88 , 89, 91, 93, 95, 107, 
197,246, 506 

menstrual 117,130, 152- 153, 156, 197, 211, 

221, 251, 267, 274 - 275, 503 - 509 
after delivery or when scanty 109 
cramps 96, 104,114, 149, 155, 157, 323 
delayed or difficult 141,137,150,155 
discharge 85, 111 

disorders 80, 96, 103, 158, 261, 266, 275 

excess 133 -134 

irregular or excess 85, 93 

pain 93, 95-96,107,156 

promotes 85 

regulator 87, 507 

mental conditions 21 - 23, 102, 104, 147, 192, 

261 

disorders 155,158, 199, 314-315 
retardation 192 
menus 163 
meridian 51, 207 
mesua ferrea linn. 96 
metabolic 78, 107, 531 - 539 
metabolism 88 , 122,152 - 153, 156, 211, 246, 

293 

metal toxic liver 92 
methi 157 
microwaves 127 

migraines 70, 104,154, 197, 201, 276, 285, 545 
milk 71 -72,146,145,153 
beauty care 246 
mi lk hedge 104 
millet 140 

mind 35, 75, 84,102, 106,108, 122,125 - 127, 

133, 136 - 137, 140 - 141,144, 146 - 147, 
151, 158,172, 174 - 175, 200, 250 - 251, 

286, 289 - 290, 295, 297, 304 - 305, 309, 314 
-315, 328, 335, 343 


SEE ALSO mental 
sluggish 209 
mind cell 345 
mind’s heart 343 
mineral pitch 103 
mineral water 153 

minerals 129, 131,134- 136, 138, 152 

minerals and metals 553 

miscarriage 133, 298, 506, 517 

miseries 263 

mishamitita 94 

mithya ahar vihar 40 

moderation 67 

moksha 57 

molasses 152 

monk’s hood 110 

monoplegia 181 

moodiness 96 

moonstone 324 

morning sickness 133, 157 - 158 

mosquitos 109, 250 

moths 108, 250 

moti bhasma 327 

motion sickness 130 

motivation 315 

mountain ebony 90 

mouth 44, 70, 72, 80, 95,197, 199, 204, 252, 262, 

451 - 454 

dry 41, 131, 198, 240 
MSG 147 

mucilaginous 74, 102, 111 

mucoid secretions 34 

mucuna pmriens bak. 91 

mucus 72, 77, 79, 81, 84, 87 - 88, 96, 99, 111, 

129 - 131,139,142,144 - 145,149,156, 
158,185,187 - 188,195,198,201 - 203, 
209, 211, 281, 285, 287, 431 - 433 
pulse 50 

mucus membrane 34, 78 - 79, 84 - 85, 87, 89, 97, 
102,109- 111,122,138,152,192,434- 
436 

mud-caused disorder (children) 517 
mudras 291, 294 - 297, 305, 582 

mukha roga 451-452 

mula bandha 260, 293 

muladhara chakra 259, 270, 313, 316-317 

multani methi 246 





Index 


multiple sclerosis 30, 75, 192, 235, 265, 475 - 

476 

mung beans (mungdal) 129, 135, 142 
murcha 

SEE fainting 
murchha kumbhaka 289 
murdha taila 242 

muscles 24, 27 - 30,75 - 77,78, 82 - 83, 85, 90, 
95 - 96, 99,102,104,107, 111, 122,130, 
135 - 136,140,143 - 144,147 - 150,152, 
159,161,172,180,182,192,198, 205, 207 
- 208, 212, 235, 244, 250, 292, 308, 328, 
335 

muscular dystrophy 192 
mushrooms 137 
music therapy 313, 318 - 328 
musk 252 
musta 96 
mustard 149, 157 
mustard greens 137 
mustard oil 173, 176, 209 
mutra 19 

mutra vriddhi/scrotum (fluid) 493 
mutra-sharkara 

SEE urinary gravel 
mutra-ashmari 

SEE urinary stones 
mutra-ghata 

SEE urinary diseases 
mutra-ghatadi 

SEE urine retention 
mutra-krichra 

SEE dysuria 103,170, 246, 419 
mutraghata 

SEE urine obstmction 
mutravaha srota 27 - 30 
mutton 148 

mutually contradictory foods 551 
mycocardial necrosis 70 myotic 118 
myrobalan 88 myrrh 79, 250 - 252 


N 

nabhi 217, 219, 221, 224, 226, 228, 231 
nabho mudra 297 

nada 290 - 291, 294, 313 - 314, 317 


nadl 31,147,185,258, 260 - 261,263, 265,267 - 
271, 281 - 282, 284, 289, 296, 314, 316 
nadl Shodhana pranayama 286 
nadl sveda 182 

nadlprakasham/nadlvijnanam 46 - 47 
nadl-vrana 
SEE sinus 
nagkcshar 96 
nails 31, 76, 150 
napping 128 
Narayan taila (oil) 552 
narcotic 110, 153 
nardostachys jatamansi DC. 89 
nasa-gata-roga-vijnaniya 
SEE nose diseases 
nasal massage/passage 201, 287 
nasikagra drishti 261 
nasya 197 - 202 
nature 39, 337 

nausea 31, 34,41,70 - 72,79, 83 - 85, 97,100, 

106 - 108,122,131 - 133,136,156 - 158, 
161,170,173,180,186, 252 
navarakizhi 235 
navel 16, 315 
navy beans 142 
nayana-bhighata-pratishedha 
SEE eye injury (external cause) 
nayana-budbuda/eyeball diseases 437 - 439 
neck 98, 197, 202, 238, 242, 273, 306 - 307 
nectarines 133 
neem 97 

negative ions 106, 310 
negative thoughts 50, 250 
negativity 201 
neon lights 321 
neoplasm 493 - 501 

nerve 31, 70 - 71, 73 - 75, 77 - 80, 84, 86 , 88 - 89, 
92, 95 - 97, 99 - 102,104,106 - 108,110, 
122, 130, 140, 142, 144,146, 148 - 151, 153, 

156 - 157,159,161,192,198, 207 - 209, 219 
- 221, 224, 226, 242, 245, 250 - 251, 261, 
263, 269 - 270, 274, 285, 287 - 289, 292 - 
293, 309, 311, 314 - 316, 321, 323, 326, 328, 
332, 336 

disorders 70 - 71, 80,130,157,159,209 
headaches 72, 99 
inflammatory 77,157 






The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


pain 77, 86,122,131,155 - 156, 328 
plexuses 35,282 
tonic 71,198, 289 

nervine 71, 75, 77, 80, 85 - 89, 91, 97, 99,102, 104, 
106 - 107,110,118,136,143 - 144,146, 

151,153,156,158, 329 

nervous (and nervous system) 71, 73 - 75, 77 - 80, 
82, 84 - 89, 91 - 93, 97, 99 - 104,106 - 112, 
127,132,136,140,155 - 157,159,161, 176, 
181,192, 201, 207 - 208, 214, 222, 231, 233 
- 235, 238, 243, 259 - 261, 269, 273, 280, 
284, 286, 294, 314 - 316, 323, 326 - 328, 
336, 340, 457 - 476 
neti pot 208 

netra basti/eye bath 243 - 244 

neuralgia 77 - 78, 83, 93, 104, 107, 109 - 110, 

131,156,196, 250-251 
neurasthenia 143 - 144, 156 - 157, 186, 328 
neurolgical disorders 192 
neuromuscular 235 
neurosis 87, 196, 280 
new-bom babies abyhanga 213 
newlyweds(hair oil) 241 
niacin 134, 136 - 137, 140,159 
nicotine toxicity 133 
nidana 39 

night blindness 208, 243, 447 
night sweats 158 
niketa 31 

nila 217, 220 - 222, 224, 226, 228, 231 
nimba/neem 97 
nipples (sore) 252 
nirama 150 

nirbikalpa samadhi 318 
nirgundl 97 
niruha basti 192 - 196 
nirvana Shakti 318 
nitrogen 141 

niyama 33, 257, 341 - 342 
nocturnal emission 143 
non-stealing 342 
non-unctuous basti 
SEE niruha basti 
nonviolence 33 
nori 138 

nose 106 - 108,110,184,192,197 - 200, 202 - 
203, 238, 240, 262, 274, 327, 431 - 434 


pulse 50 

nourishing 105,140,144 - 151,170,172, 208 

numbness 77 

nursing 85 

nutgrass 96 

nutmeg 71, 157 

nutrients 142, 146,154, 269 

nutrition 57 - 58, 67, 73, 105 -167 

nutritive tonic 72, 79, 102 - 103, 105,109, 111, 329 

nuts & seeds 142 - 144 


O 

oats 140 

obesity 87, 92, 95, 97,103,110,123,130,132 - 
134,148,156,170,172,185 - 186, 285, 

389 - 390 

pulse 50 

SEE ALSO overweight 
oblique abdominal muscles 302 
observation 43 - 44 
obstetrics 509 
obstructions 97, 197, 235 
odana 188 
office yoga 305 

oils 128, 173 - 174, 176, 207 - 210 , 231 - 246 
Anu 433, 552 
Bilwa 433 
Narayan 433 
Shad Bindu 433, 552 

ojas 20, 23, 34 - 35, 41, 72, 75, 87, 103, 105, 134, 
142 - 146, 149 - 151, 170, 176 - 177, 188, 
204, 233 - 234, 246, 249 - 251, 314 - 315, 
323,328 
okra 137 

oleation 149, 169, 171, 173, 176- 179 
olive 150 
olive oil 173 
onion 100 

ophthalmia 79, 88,92,99,104,443,451 
opisthotonos 459 
optic nerve 208 
oranges 132 

orbital cellulitis 445 
orchis mascula linn. 101 





Index 


oregano 157 
organ pulse 51 - 52 
organic 147,583 - 583 
organs and herbs 205, 547 
origin sites 35, 176, 212 
osteoarthritis 235 
osteoporosis 72, 99, 192, 208 
outer breath retention/bahya kumbhaka 290 
outer disease pathway 32, 42, 180 
ovarian fibroids 75, 505, 507 
overweight 137, 139, 153, 167, 170 
SEE ALSO obesity, weight 
overwork 75, 104 
ovum 26, 103, 264, 267, 269, 294 
oxalis comiculata linn. 81 
oxygen 281, 287, 292, 306 
oxygenate 106, 153 
ozone 106 


P 

pachaka agni 71 
pachaka Pitta 17, 34 - 35 
padabhyanga 245 
padma 250 

padmasana/lotus pose 258, 260 
pain 31, 41, 70 - 72, 74, 76, 78 - 79, 81, 85, 97 - 
98,102,107 - 111, 123,131,136,138,141, 
149 - 150,155 - 158,170,182,184,186, 
188,190,194 - 195,197, 202, 208, 231, 

237, 241 - 244, 246, 250 - 251, 274, 285, 
307, 309,316, 323, 335, 342 
abdominal 41, 70, 76, 109, 111, 132, 149, 155 - 
157,180,192,196, 275 
back 70,76, 86,123,132,192,196 
childbirth 95, 98,133, 213, 252, 299, 303 
heart 31,93,123, 323 

joint 70,76,31, 81 - 82, 85,95,108,132,141, 
157, 170, 182, 184 
menstrual 93,95 - 96,107,149 
nerve 77, 86,122,131,156, 328 
rheumatic 99,109 
rib 92 - 94,155,186 
testes 31,90 
palate 30,453,533 
palliation 170,172 -173 


pallor 202 

palpitations 31, 96,104,107 - 108,112,131,140, 
155- 156, 274,315 
pancha karma 7, 196 - 249 
panchang 240 

pancreas 34 - 35,76 - 77, 84, 86, 95 - 96,107,125, 
131 - 132,135,139 - 140,146,152,153, 221 

- 222, 229, 268 - 269, 277, 288 
panir 145 

panna bhasma 328 
pantha 31 
pandu-roga 
SEE anemia 
papaya 132 
para nada 291 

paralysis 71, 74 - 75, 77, 83, 88, 92, 95, 99 - 101, 
104,110,130,141,155,176,196, 231, 235, 
316,459-460,462-463 
facial 77, 91,145,153,176,197, 231, 233, 240, 
459 - 460,462 - 463 
paraplegia 181,192, 361 

parasites 70,74,79, 81 - 82, 87 - 88, 96 - 97,100, 
103,110- 111,113,118,122,132- 133,135 

- 136,138,144,150- 151,155,186,190, 
193,197,199-200, 251,381 

pulse 50 
parasiticide 118 

parasympathetic nervous system 284, 286, 311 

parathyroid 182, 274, 293, 311, 549 

parisheka 181 - 183, 233 - 234 

Parkinson’s 91, 192, 208, 476 

parshva-Shula 378 

parsley 137 

parturifacient 118 

parturition 211 

paschimottanasana 258, 263 

pashana bheda 98 

pashasana 268 

passages 31 

passion 317 

pasta 141 

pastes 237, 246 - 247 
pasyanti291 
Patanjali 257 
patchouli 250 
pathogenesis 39 
pathology (samprapti) 39 






The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


pathothenic acid (B5) 159 
patience 317 
payasam 74, 235 
peace 315, 317 
peaches 132 
peanuts 142, 150 
pearl 324 - 325, 327 
pears 133 
peas 138 
pecan 144 
pectin 129 

pelvis 83, 272, 276, 302 - 304, 505 

peppermint 158, 250 

perception 136, 158, 250, 281, 287, 315 

perfect pose/siddhasana 258 - 259, 305 

perforated colon, intestines, stomach 30 

perfume 78 

peridot 324 

peritoneal 99 

peritonitis 85 

perspiration 90, 96, 133, 171 
pesticides 151, 581 pets 100,108, 554 
peya 188 

phanta/hot infusions 551 
pharyngitis 88, 156 

phlegm 74, 94,122, 131,134, 137, 141, 149,151, 
174, 250, 286, 289 
pulse 50 

phosphorus 134 - 138, 141 - 144, 16 - 1621 
phyllanthus niruri linn. 78 
physical body 343 - 345, 348 
picrorrhiza kurroa benth. 91 
pigeon pose/kapotasana 271 
pigmented patches on face 246 
pills 552 

plnasa/rhinitis 186, 197, 200 - 202, 433, 435 
pinda sveda 235 - 237 
pudding mix 235 

pineal gland 35, 207, 214, 221, 269, 274, 283, 296, 
323, 548 
pineapple 133 

piiigala 257, 260, 265, 280, 283, 286 - 287, 291, 

293 -295,316-317 
pinguecula442 
pinon 144 
pinto beans 142 


piper longum linn. 98 
piper nigrum linn. 95 
pippali 72, 98 
pistachio 144 
pitariasis 77 

Pitta 14 - 18, 21 - 22, 32 - 35, 41, 70 - 73, 76 - 79, 
83 - 85, 87, 92 - 93, 95, 99,108, 111, 128, 
130 - 132,134 - 135,142 - 143,145 - 146, 
149- 155,158,164,170 
pituitary 70, 109, 214, 221, 269, 274, 287, 293 - 
294, 296,311 
pizhichil 234 

plantago ispagula/plantago ovata forsk. 88 - 89 
plasma 24, 27 - 31, 35, 42, 73 - 74, 76 - 86 , 90 - 
99,101,104 - 110,116,129 - 131,138,140 
141, 144 - 146, 148, 152, 154, 176 - 177, 
195, 205, 207 - 208, 295 
plasters/lepas 87, 98, 141, 237, 246 - 247 
plastics 581 

plough pose/halasana 274 
plumbago zeylanica linn. 82 
plums 133 

PMS 96,130,159,161, 222, 250, 507 
pneumonia, infant 92, 110 
poison 77, 81, 83, 106, 110, 151, 154, 157, 171, 
176,186,190, 246 
animal bites 74 
metal 159 
poliomyelitis 192 
pollution 581 - 582 
polyps 107, 192 
pomegranate 133 
poppy seeds 158 
pork 148 

post digestive/vipaka 61 
post-natal depression 252 
post-partum 70, 86 , 95,103, 135,140, 142,152, 
156,213, 252, 301,512 
post svedhana 185 
posture 298, 306 - 307 

potassium 130 - 132,134 - 135,136,138 - 144 
potatoes 138 

potency/vlrya 20 

poultice 78 - 79, 81, 85,90,96, 98,105 - 106,108 
110,140,142,180 
poultry 147 





Index 


powders 552 prabhava 125 
pradara 

SEE menorrhagia 
pradhamana 197, 199, 201 
pradhana karma 185 
pradhena 237 

pradhmapana 197,199, 201 
prakriti 14, 46, 52 
pralaya 345 
pralepa 237 

prameha/obstinate urinary diseases 72, 82, 423 
prameha pidaka/diabetic ulcer 426 - 427 
pran/prana 16, 23, 58,107, 121,154, 249, 261, 
263, 269 - 270, 280, 282, 284, 294, 314 - 
315, 332, 348 
prana Vayu 16, 35, 238 
pranavaha srota 27 - 30 
pranayam 174, 257, 280 - 287 
pranic energies 259 - 260, 321 
prasad 152 
prasadana 243, 449 
pratimarsha 198 - 199 
pratishyaya 
SEE colds 
pratyahara 280 
pravahika 

SEE dysentery 
praval 99, 328 (bhasma) 
prayer 33 

pregnancy 70, 83, 88, 93,103,132,152,156, 213, 
252,510-511 
pulse 50 

yoga postures for 298 - 301 
preliminary therapies 173 
premature graying 72, 161, 198, 235, 241 - 242 
premonitory signs of illness (purvarupa) 39 
preservatives 127 
prevention 35 
prickly chaff flower 73 
pride 317 
pritivi 347 - 348 
progesterone 109,294 

prolapse 85, 88,106,122 
properties of the three doshas 16 
prophylactic 94 
propolis 151 


prostate 30 -31,98,135 - 136,138,149,238,422, 
461,501,524 
protease inhibitors 143 

protein 34, 88, 129, 133, 135, 138, 140 - 143, 207 
psoralea corylifolia linn. 76 
psoriasis 76, 80, 88, 149, 185, 246, 481, 485, 489 
psychic knots/granthis 287 
SEE ALSO granthis (tumors) 
psychological diseases 321 
psychology 337 - 341 
psychosomatic 39, 280 
psychotherapy 39 
psyllium 73, 144 
ptosis 441 

puakusha/gingivitis 533 
puja 152, 250 
pulmonary 70, 98,106 
pulse 46-51, 250 
pumpkin seeds 144 
punamava 99 
puncture vine 86 

pungent 35, 67 - 68, 71, 73, 75 - 76, 78 - 79, 81, 83 
- 85, 87 - 88, 91 - 100,102 - 103,106 - 108, 
110, 121 - 125, 128, 130 - 142, 144 - 146, 
148 - 150,153 - 158 
punster/male reproductive system 522 
pure awareness 88, 317 

purgation therapyAdrechana 34,189 - 191, 197 
purgative 72 - 75,77, 83, 85, 90, 92, 96 - 97, 99 - 
100,104,118,122,149,169 - 172,176,185, 

189 - 191 , 246 

purification therapy 172, 176 - 179 
purifying mantras 316 
purisha 19 

purishavaha srota 27 - 30 
purity 289, 342 
purpura 93 
purusha 39 
purva karma 173 
purvarupa 39 
pus 87,104, 237 
pushti 208 
puta-paka 448 
pyorrhea 135 





The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Q 

quartan malaria 94 
quartz crystal 327 - 328 
questionnaires 43, 52 - 56 
quinsy 533 


R 

radiation 130, 155 
radish 138 
rag (raga) 318-319 
rainy season 40, 177 
raised lotus pose 261 
raisins 131 

rajas/rajasic 13, 21, 141, 127, 153, 156, 210, 250, 
281,316-317, 322-323, 347 
raja yoga 285 
raja-yakshma 

SEE TB (pulmonary) 
rakta 24 

rakta mokSha 202 
raktaja gulma 498 - 499 
raktang 100 
raktapitta 355 - 357 
SEE ALSO bleeding 
raktavaha srota 27 - 30 
raktpunamava 99 
ram mantra 314 - 315 
ranjak Pitta 17, 321 

rasa 18 - 20, 24, 26 - 30, 35, 57, 59 - 60, 67, 129, 
152,195, 295,315 
minerals and metals 553 
rasavaha srota 27 - 30, 295 
rasavahini 31 
rasayana 7, 35, 100, 251 
SEE ALSO rejuvenatives 
rashes 83 - 84, 92,122,124,130,132,135,138, 
140,150 
rasonam 100 
raspberries 133 

rauwolfia serpentina benth. 101 
Ravi Shankar 319 
raw honey 151 
raw foods 126 
rechanaka 100 

reclining twist, postpartum asanas 302 


rectal ulcer (babies) 517 

rectum 81, 85,106 

red blood cells 72, 133,135 

red coral 327 

red garnet 324, 327 

red hogweed 99 

red raspberry 85 

red spots 81 

reduction therapy 169 -171 
refined food 141 
refined sweets 150 
reflexes 104 

refrigerant 72, 78, 81, 83, 86, 92, 102, 107, 118, 
129 - 135,137 - 139,142 - 143,149 - 150 
rejuvenation 35, 146, 150 - 152, 157, 204, 233 - 
235,246,315 

rejuvenatives 72, 74 - 75, 77, 79 - 80, 86 - 88, 91 - 
93, 99 - 100, 102 - 103,105,107 - 109, 111, 
119, 134, 142 - 146, 148, 150 - 151,157, 
187, 251 -252, 329, 332, 336 
SEE ALSO rasayana 
renal calculi 83 

reproductive 16,18 - 19, 27 - 31, 59 - 61, 68, 581 
aromas 250 - 251 
gems 326 - 327, 329 

herbs 71, 74 - 75, 77 - 80, 82, 84 - 86, 88 - 
101,103,105 - 107,109, 111, 315, 503 - 
525 

nutrition 122 - 124,130, 134 - 135,140 - 144, 
148, 153,157 

pancha karma 176, 208, 219, 221 - 222, 224 
- 225, 227 

yoga/pranayam 261, 265, 267 - 268, 270 - 272, 
282 - 283,289,295 

requirements of practitioner & patient 32 
research 571 
reserpine alkaloid 101 
reside 31 

resolvent 80,95,118 

respiratory 31,112,132,138,157, 283, 285, 287, 
292,315,335,409-417 
herbs 70 - 71,75 - 77,79 - 80, 82 - 84, 86, 88 - 
91, 94 - 100,102 - 104,106 - 109, 111 
restaurant food 127 
restorative 101,118 
retarded 71 
retching 71 





Index 


reticular activating system 310 
rheum emodi wall 73 
rheumatic conjunctivitis 95 
rheumatism 

foods 130 - 131,135,139,141,149,157 
herbs 70 - 73,75,77 - 78, 80, 82 - 83, 85 - 88, 
90 - 94, 96 - 100,102,106 - 107,109 - 110, 
pancha karma 186, 192, 231, 235, 237 - 238, 
250, 265, 267, 269, 272, 275, 287, 545 - 
546 
pulse 50 

rheumatoid arthritis 95, 272, 275 
rhinitis 186,197, 202, 433 , 435 
rhubarb 73 

riboflavin 135 - 136, 140 
ribs 92, 94, 209, 264, 401 
rice 140 
rickets 136 

ricinus communis linn. 85 

Rig Veda Bhasyabhumika 284 

rigidity 41 

ringworm 78,144 

ritual 250 

rock candy 71, 152 

rock salt 71,152 

roga 21 

root cause 10 

root chakra 315 

ropana 243, 449 

rosacea 246 

rose 251 

rosemary 158, 251 
rough chaff tree 73 
roundworm 91, 130, 144 
royal jelly 151 
rubefacient 95, 104, 118 
rubia cordifolia linn. 95 
rubus wallichii 85 
ruby 324 - 327, 329 
rudhrapushpa 251 
rukshana 169 -170 
rupa39 
rutabaga 139 
rye 140 


S 

sacred creeping grass 93 
sadhaka Pitta 17 

sadhana 33, 57, 63,112,126,129, 282, 284 - 285, 
290 - 292, 294 - 295, 309, 316 - 317, 332, 
338, 342, 346 
sadness 346 
safflower 150, 173 
saffron 71, 93 
sage 158, 252 

sahasrara chakra 265, 313, 316, 318 

saibikalpa 64 

salad 150 

salam-miShn 101 

salamba sarvaiigasana 273 

salep orchid 101 

saliva 35,41, 152,211 

salivation 186 

salt 127, 152 

salty taste 40, 67 - 68, 122 - 125 
sama 150 

samadhi 21 -22, 64, 281, 290 
samagni 18 

samana Vayu 16, 35, 269, 282 
samnyasa/comas 30, 107 - 109, 473 
samprapti 39 
samsarajana 189 - 190 
samshamana 173, 175 
samashodhana 172 
samtarpana 169 
samvritasamvrita 31 
sanatana dharma 7 
sandalwood 251 

sandhi mukti/fractures 74, 87, 140, 406 - 407 

sandhigata-roga-vijnaniya 439 

sapta dhatus 144 

Saraswati 315, 317 

sarca indica linn. 75 

sariva 101 

sarpa-darushtrika 86 
sarpa-gandha 101 sarsaparilla 101 
sarva-gata-roga-abhishyandha 
SEE conjunctivitis 
sarvanga dhara 234 
sarvanga senchana 234 
satiated pulse 50 
sattwavajaya 39 





The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


sattwic/sattwa 13, 21, 35,44, 63 - 64, 210, 215, 246, 
251,281,317, 322, 347 
foods 126 - 127,129,134,136,139,140 - 144, 
146 - 147, 150, 152 - 154,156 - 157 
herbs 72 - 73,75, 80, 84, 86, 93, 99,103,105 - 
108, 111, 114, 
saussurea lappa clarke. 94 
saxifraga ligulata wall 98 
scabies 104 
scalds 88, 105 
scalp cracking 242 
scapula 197 
scarlet fever 83 
schizophrenia 238 

sciatica 70,76 - 77, 81 - 82, 85 - 86, 99,139,157, 
192, 194,196, 263, 272, 275, 287, 461, 463 
pulse 50 
scleritis 442 
sclerotic coat 441 
scorpion stings 81 
scraping 449 
scrofula 98 - 99,170 
scrotum enlarged 184, 192, 493 
fluid 493 

scurvy 79, 81, 98, 131 - 132,135 

sea salt 152 

sea vegetables 138 

seasons 32 - 33, 35,40,128, 332 - 335 
seated twist - postpartum asanas 302 
seated wall-leg stretch - postpartum asanas 301 
secretions 74, 86 - 87, 92, 158 
sedative 74 - 75, 89 - 90,101 - 102,104, 110 - 
122,135,138,144,150,157, 201 
suppressing natural urges 29, 31 
seed mantra 70, 313 
seers 328 

self-absorption 318 

Self-Realization 10- 11,33,124, 257 - 258, 281, 
284- 285, 294, 314, 316,318, 338 - 339, 342, 
346 

self-test 52 - 56,583 
self-worth 338 

semen 75, 78 - 79, 109,130, 132, 141,143, 145, 

- 146,157,170,184,189 - 190,192, 205, 
218, 226, 246, 264, 267, 294, 317, 344 - 
345, 420, 522 - 523 
seminal 86, 89, 93, 157, 420 


senility 80,109,260,274 

senna 73 

sense organs 234 

senses 31,147 - 148,151,172,197,199 - 204, 
206, 211, 226, 233 - 235, 242, 250, 344 
serenity 238, 322 
serotonin 141 

serpent pose/bhujangasana 266 
sesame 105,144,150,173,176, 209 
sesamum indicum DC. 105 
setu bandha sarvangasana 273 
seven body constitutions 6 
seven dosha categories 17 
seven tissues (dhatus) 18 - 19, 144, 146 
sexual debility 75,77,101 - 103,133 - 134,137, 
144,148, 274 - 275, 328 
Shad bindu taila (oil) 433, 552 
shaking 315 

Shakti 23, 296,313-314 
Shalabhasan/locust pose 266 
Shalakya tantra 7 
Shalya tantra 7 
sham mantra 315 

Shamana 169 - 170, 172 - 173, 179,198 

Shambhavl mudra 262 

shankha marma 216 

Shankar Sen 46 

Shank pushpl 102 

Sharat 40 

sharlrachidra 31 

Shastras 147, 317 

Shatamull 102 

Shatapatra 250 

Shatavan 35,102 

Shavasana/corpse pose 279 

Sheka (eye sprinkling) 449 

shellfish 148 

Shiksha, diksha, parlksha 318 

Shilajit 23,103 

Shira31 

shiro basti 240 - 241 
Shiro dhara 238 - 240 
Shiro lepa 238 

Shiro-roga-vijnaniya/head disorders 543 
Shiro virechananasya 198 
Shishira 40, 170, 333 
Shltall/cooling breath 174, 285 - 286 





Index 


shit kail kumbhaka 289 
Shiva 88,317 
Shllpada/elephantiasis 494 
Shleshaka kapha 17 
shock 107,156 

ghodhana 169 - 170,172 - 173,176,179, 233 
Shopha/Shotha 
SEE edema 

shoulder 197, 269 - 271, 275, 299, 302, 307 
shoulder stand/salamba sarvangasana 174 
Shrama 208 
shrlm mantra 315 

Shuklagata-roga-vijnaniya/sclerotic coat 441 
Shukra 25 - 26,145 - 146, 149, 315 
Shukra-Shmari/scminal stones 420 
Shukravaha srota 27 -30 
Shula 
SEE colic 
Shum mantra 315 
ShunthEShuntha/ginger 71 
Shvasa 

SEE breahing difficulty 
Shweta musali 103 
sialagogue 71,118 
sickle cell anemia 358 
sida cordifolia linn. 76 
siddha yoni asana 259, 305 
siddhasana 258 - 259, 305 
Silk Road 8 
silver cookware 556 
simhasana 258, 262 
singers 262 

sinus 94, 98,156 - 158,176,180,186, 201, 209, 
220, 241, 249 - 250, 274, 276, 287, 331, 
401- 402 

congestion 95, 106, 156, 274, 276 
dryness 202,433 
headache 108, 262 - 263, 276 
pulse 50 

sinusitis 108,138,201,287 
sita 20 

sitopaladi 70 
six seasons 333 

six stages of disease development 41-42 
six tastes 20, 121 
skeletal disease 95 

skin 31, 122, 251, 264, 295, 328, 479 - 490 


food 130 - 136,138 - 140,143 - 146,148 - 
151,157,159,161 

herbs 70,74 - 78, 80 - 84, 87 - 92, 94 - 101,103 
- 106,108 - 109 

pancha karma 170 - 172, 176, 178, 180, 185 - 
186,189,191,197 - 198, 202, 209, 212, 235, 
237 - 238, 245 - 246 

skull, veins, joints, ligaments, tendons 197 
sleep 41,77,146,158,199, 203, 208 - 209, 235, 
245, 294 
sleepy 34 

slimming, snehana/oil therapy 176 
slipped discs 269 
sluggishness 34, 277, 287 
small caltrops 86 

small intestine 34, 41, 89, 92, 190, 211, 216 

smallpox 189 

smell 197, 202, 432 - 434 

smoke inhalation therapy 202 

smoking 142, 202, 469 - 470 

snakebites 110 

sneezing 31, 106, 203, 432 

sneha, medicated ghee and oil 198, 552 

snehana 149,169,171 - 173,176 - 179, 235 

snehapana 176 - 178 

Snigdhajlra 88 

snuff 71 - 72, 107, 197 - 200, 202 
snuhl/thohar 104 
soda 153 

sodium 135 - 136,139,161 - 162 
solanum indicum linn. 80 solanum 
nigrum linn. 91 

solanum xanthocarpum schrad 91 

solar breathing/suryabheda pranayama 128, 286 

solar channel 286 

solar plexus 268, 292, 315 soma 332 
soma chakra 317 
sonph 157 

sore mouth, gargle 88 

sore throat 71, 79, 83, 85, 88, 90 - 92, 96, 110 - 
111, 131,133,136,156 - 158,186, 252, 262, 
266 

soreness from nursing 302 

sores 78, 83, 85, 87, 92, 94 - 96,136,140,142,144, 
149-151,158 
sorrel 81 
sorrow 317 





The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


Soul 317 

sound/nada 290 - 291,294,313 - 319 

sour 20, 67-68, 122- 125 

sour cream 146 

soy 142, 150 

spaces inside the body 31 

spasmodic hysteria 89 

spasms 71 -72,74,78 - 79, 81 - 83, 87, 89, 93 - 94, 
96, 100, 102, 104, 106 - 109, 111, 136, 149 - 
151,155 - 158,182, 202, 218, 233, 244, 250 
speakers 262 
spearmint 158, 250 
special properties 62 
speech 197, 314-315, 317, 328 
sperm in bladder 30 
spermatorrhea 91, 99, 103,110, 137 
sphatika bhasma 328 
spices 127,148 - 150,155 - 158 
spinach 138 
spinal marrow 104 
spinal twist/ofice yoga 306 
spinal twist pose/matsyendrasana 268 
spine 208, 244, 268, 272 - 273, 275, 299 - 300, 

306 

curvature 271 

spirit, sun & moon/red & white 257 
spiritual Ayurveda 8, 343 
body 346 

dangerous practices 547 
healing 112, 321 
heart 344 
lacking 57 
perception 328 

spleen 72,76, 84 - 85, 88, 92 - 93,95 - 98,104, 

107,125,131 - 132,137,140,145 - 146,153, 
164, 323, 326, 336, 355, 372 , 401, 547 

enlarged 30, 42, 70, 77, 81 - 83, 85, 90 - 92, 
111, 131, 142, 182, 356, 358, 370 - 371 , 

374, 465, 495, 499, 537 

pancha karma 170, 172, 189, 190, 202, 205, 
218,221 - 222, 226- 228 

pulse 50 

yoga 260 - 261,269, 277, 286, 288, 297 


spogel seeds 88 

spongy gums 80, 88 

sprains 78, 88, 97, 149, 184, 250, 277 

spreading hogweed 99 

spring water 154 

sprinkling 183, 234 

sprue 79, 367 

spurs 30 

squash 138 

srotas 23, 26 - 31, 43, 147 - 149, 153, 155 - 156, 
158, 170, 194, 233, 335 
srutis 346 
stability 315, 317 
stabilizing 139, 145 
stagnant food 73 
stagnation, yogaraj guggul 70 
stambhana 169, 171 
stammering 461 

stana vidradhi/breast abscess 402 
standing bow pose 272 
steam therapy 173, 181, 211 
sternum pain 244 
steroids 111, 127, 144, 146 
sthana 31 

sthapani 225, 226, 228, 230 
sthula sharlra 343 

stiffness 70,169,171,180,182,184,197, 208, 

218, 220, 246, 275, 298, 308 - 309, 323, 
331,335 
joints 102, 235 

neck 102,186,197,199, 201, 331,459 
thighs 139,170,172,181,460 
stimulant 70, 71, 75, 77 - 79, 81 - 84, 86 - 89, 93- 
97,100,104,107- 108,110,118, 
food 124,131 - 134,136 - 138,146,149,152 - 
154-158 

stomach 30, 34 - 35, 41, 45, 52, 70 - 74, 79, 82 - 
86, 92-93, 98,102,110- 111,126- 127, 

130 - 137,139 - 140,145 - 146,151 - 152, 
185,250, 260-261,269, 297 
stomachic 72 - 74, 76,78 - 79 , 82 - 84, 86,92 - 94,96 
- 97, 99,102,104- 105,107,119,131,157 
stones 79,136 

stool 18 - 20, 92, 96,129, 132,139, 142, 144 
strain 31,170 
strawberries 134 

strength 89,103,106 -108,122 -124,127,130,132, 


split peas 142 





Index 


136 - 143,145 - 149,152 - 158,176,195,209, 
246, 265,315 

stress 104,130, 207 - 209, 212, 280, 306 - 308, 315 
stretch marks 149, 252 
strokes 130 
study of scriptures 342 
sthula Sharir 343 
stunted growth 130 
stupor 72, 202 
sturdiness 
SEE tissues 
styptic 90, 119 
subconscious 280 
subtle body 88 
sucanat 151 
sudation/svedhana 180 
sudorific 96 
suffering 346 

sugar 72, 86, 110, 121 - 123, 128, 129 - 134, 139 - 
143,145 - 148,150 - 153,155,166,170,175 
metabolism 92, 132 - 133, 151 
sukshma sharlra/astral body 321, 343 - 344 
sulfur 135 - 136,139,142 - 143 
summer heat 85 
sun overexposure 74 
sun salute pose/suryasana 277 - 279 
sunbathing 173 - 174 
sunburn 149,246, 252 
sunflower 150,176 
sunflower seeds 144 
sunstroke 112, 131 - 132, 142 
supple body 146 
suppressed emotions 31 
suppressing natural urges 29, 31, 50 
suppuration 81 
surgery 8, 182 

survana vasant malti 475, 527 
Surya 287, 322 
suryabheda pranayama 286 
suryasana/sun salute pose 277 - 279 
Sushrut Samhita 6 

sushumna 23, 257, 260, 264 - 265, 269, 282, 290 
-296,313-314,316-317, 338 
svara-bedha 
SEE hoarsness 

svedhana 169,171,173,176,180- 185 
swabhavoparama 39 


swadhishthan chakra 259, 317 
swadu 20 

Swam! Shankar Purushottam Tlrtha 67, 317 
Swami Narayan Tirtha 113 
swapna 209 
swarasa/herb juice 551 
swastikasana 258, 263 

sweat 19, 27 - 30, 82, 122, 173, 182 - 185, 245 
SEE ALSO svedhana 
sweet 20, 67 - 68, 122 - 126 
sweet potato 111, 138 
sweeteners 150 

swelling 70,75, 78 - 79, 85, 88, 90,92, 97 - 98, 
104,109,136,142,149,157,193,195,197, 
229,235, 237 
swollen 131, 142, 158 

glands 30, 77, 86, 328 
prostate 30-31 
testes 77, 90 

swooning breath/murchha kumbhaka 289 
sympathetic nerves 287 
sympathetic nervous system 284, 286 
synovial fluid 207 

syphilis 74, 97 - 98,101,104,109, 524 
syrup 71, 150 - 151 
systemic diseases 235 


T 

T.S. Elliot 316 
tadan kriya 296 
tagara 104 
tahini 35 
taila seka 234 

talu vidradhi/palatal abscesses 533 
talugata roga/palate disorders 453 
tamarind 111 

tamas/tamasic 13 - 14,21 - 23,44,100,104,127, 
134,137, 141,144, 147 - 148, 152, 155, 
157, 210, 215, 280 - 281, 316 - 317, 322 - 
323, 346 - 347 
tangerine 134 
tanmatras 344 
tannic acid 133 
tapa svedhana 180 
tapas 342 





The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


tapeworm 100,110 133,144 
tarpaka 17 
tarpana 448 

taste 20, 23, 35,40 - 43, 50, 57 - 63,67 - 68, 84, 
100, 121 - 126, 202, 204, 206, 220, 243, 246, 
283,317 

TB 70, 90 - 92, 98,100,109,130 - 131,135,139, 
146,153,170,193, 222, 287, 328 
pulmonary 134, 145 - 146, 153 - 154, 185, 

414 - 415 

tea 154 

substitue 81 

teeth 28,72,77,105,130 - 131,136,144,150, 

198, 200 - 204, 208, 242, 451 - 452 , 516 
tejas 23, 249, 314, 321, 323, 328, 347 - 348 
tejbal 105 

temper 274 

tension 122,149, 287 - 290, 302 - 303, 305 - 308 

terminalia arjuna 74 

terminalia belerica roxb. 78 

terminalia chebula retz. 88 

testes/testicles: pain or swollen 30 - 31, 90, 97 

testosterone 260, 294 

tetanus 80,110, 184, 459 

tetany arthritis 182 

thalmus 310, 548 

thiamine 140 

thighs 139,170, 172,184, 299 - 301 
thinking 314 

third eye/spiritual eye/ajna 228, 259, 296, 315 - 

- 146,150, 152 - 154, 170 - 174,177, 193, 

199, 203, 251,286, 537-539 
pulse 50 

thoracic life-force 293 

thorax 271 

Thoreau 11 

threadworms 109 

three agnis 18 

three causes of illness 40 

three desires 33 

three disease pathways 42 

three kinds of diseases 43 

throat 28, 30, 34, 50, 59, 68,315, 434 - 436,453 

- 454 , 533 

food 122,131,139,145- 146 

herbs 70-72, 79, 87,110 

pancha karma 170, 172, 197, 199, 203, 220, 


226, 228, 233, 238 
yoga 262, 274, 293 
SEE ALSO sore throat 
thrush 529 

thunderbolt pose/vajrol! mudra 266 
thyme 158 

thyroid 109,135,138 - 140, 268, 274, 276, 283, 
293,311 
pulse 50 
thyroxine 293 
tikshna 202 
tlkshnagni 18 

til/tila (sesame seeds) 62, 105, 144,150 

timira/blindness 190, 445 - 446 

tinctures, acetic 152 

tingling sensation 197 

tinnevelly nilavembu 82 

tinnitus - see ear ringing tinosporia 

cordifolia miers 86 

tissues 30 - 31, 250, 267, 293, 295, 309, 314, 327, 
331 -332, 335-336, 547 
food 122 - 124, 127, 129 - 132, 134, 136, 140 

- 148,150- 152,159,178 

herbs 70, 72, 74 - 75, 87, 93, 97, 104,108 
pancha Karma 169, 171 - 174, 176,178, 185, 
222,233-234,244,246 
tow contraction 184 
tofu 142 
tomatoes 139 

tongue 28, 30, 44 - 45, 71, 131, 289, 331, 453 
tonic 119, 183, 185, 246, 250-251 
food 130 - 138,140 - 146,148 - 152,157,173 

- 174 

herbs 70 - 80, 82 - 92, 94 - 95, 97 - 99,101 - 
103,105 - 106,108- 111 
toning 169, 172, 179 
tonsillitis 78, 110, 197, 293, 533 
tonsils 71 

tooth 70-72, 80,130- 131,452 
toothache 71, 81, 91 - 92, 94,105,110,156 
147, 151, 154 - 157, 202, 252,452 
toothache tree 105 
tortoise pose/kurmasana 270 
toxic 151 - 152,190 
bile pulse 50 

toxins 34, 274, 280, 321, 331 - 332, 391 - 392 
foods 126 - 127,135,139 - 140,142,146 - 





Index 


148,151 -152,154,581 
herbs 83, 87, 89, 95,104 
pancha karma 169 - 172, 174, 176 - 177, 180, 
183 - 185, 187, 190 - 191, 194, 196, 199, 
204, 207 -209,211 -212 
SEE ALSO detoxification 
trace minerals 106, 141 
trachea 34 
trachoma 440 
tracts 31 

transfer point (marmas) 228 
transmutes sexual energy 108 
traumatic injuries 80, 95 
travel excess 170 
tray man 106 

tremors 27, 31, 100,150, 176, 315, 461 
tribulis terrestris linn. 86 
trichiasis districhisis 441 
tridoshic 18, 41 
trikatu 70 
triphala 70, 79, 88 
triphala guggul 70 
trishna 
SEE thirst 
trivrt 191 
trout 148 
true gum 346 
truth 11, 338, 342 
tryptophan 207 
tuberculosis 87, 98 
SEE ALSO TB 
tulsi/tulasl 107, 250 
tumburu 105 

tumors 28, 30 - 31, 50, 59, 145, 197, 250, 421 - 
422, 494 - 498 

abdominal 99, 154, 186, 189, 494 
benign 95, 138, 184, 534 
brain 501 
breast 30, 96, 222 

foods 122 - 123,131,134 - 135, 137, 143, 
145, 147, 151, 154 

herbs 77, 87 - 88, 90, 92, 94 - 95, 97 - 98, 100 
malignant 60, 95, 147 
muscle 28, 30 
ovarian 75, 498 

pancha karma 176, 180, 185, 192, 197, 201, 
246, 


uterine 30, 75, 498 
yoga 264, 267, 297 
tur dal 129 
turbinado sugar 151 
turkey 148 
turmeric 87 
turnips 139 
turpentine 83 
tvak 107 

typhoid 79, 89,132,400 

thyroid 50,70,109,135,138-140, 207, 221, 311, 
323, 360, 548, 549 
cancer 501 

yoga poses 268,274,276,293 
SEE ALSO glands, hyperthyroid, hypothyroid, 
and sparathyroid 


U 

udakavaha 27 - 30 
udanVayu 16 

udara roga/abdominal diseases 369 
uddlyana bandha 260, 291 - 292 
udgharshana 244 

ugrasana/paschimottanasana 258, 263 
ujjayl kumbhaka 289 
ulcerations 73, 94 

ulcerative colitis 88, 95 (see also colitis) 
ulcers 30, 111, 252, 274, 280, 327 - 328, 391, 405 , 
577 

duodenal 83, 89 

food 122,128 - 131,134 - 138,140,142,155, 
158 

herbs 70,72 - 76,78, 80 - 85, 87, 89 - 90, 

92,97-99,102,104- 105,108, 111 
pancha karma 190, 209, 237 - 238, 246 
unctuous 195 

universal consciousness 348 
unmada 

SEE insanity 
upajih vika/glossitis 533 
upanaha svedhana 180 
Upanishads 13 
upashaya 39 
upper torso 306 

upward bow/urdhva dhanurasana 272 





The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


urethra 83, 89,94,130,197,421 urethritis 
99,112 

uric acid 98, 139, 147 

urinary/urine 19, 27 - 31, 50 - 51, 76, 85, 110, 

146, 182, 195, 197, 211, 269, 274, 419 - 427 
bladder 30,133,170,421 - 422, 542 
bleeding 86 , 96,135 

burning 77, 86,130, 132,136, 141 
difficult 30 - 31- 81,106,149,184 
difficult, painful, or burning 74, 137, 151, 157 
- 158, 419 
excess 133, 423 

food 122,124,130 - 133,135 - 139,141,146 
149,151 - 152,154- 155,157- 158 
gravel 98, 131,420 

herbs 70, 72 - 74, 76 - 78, 80, 82 - 88 , 93 - 94 
96, 98 - 99,101,103,105 - 107,109- 111 
increase flow 86 , 110 
involuntary 84 
obstructions 30, 184, 421 
painful 30-31,73,86, 111, 141 
passage ulcers 97 
retention or excess, 141, 197 
scanty 82 

slow elimination 421 

stones 30,79, 86,130,135,192, 419 - 420 
urinary tract 130, 133, 136 - 139, 158, 267 
uro basti 244 

urogenital 78, 83, 136, 246, 251, 315 
urticaria 156 - 157, 404 
urustambha/paraplegia 181 - 182,192, 361 
ushma svedhana 181 
ushna 21 

uterine/uterus 27 - 28, 30, 75, 77, 86 , 93, 95, 97, 
107, 205, 222, 250 - 251, 274, 301 - 302, 
503,505,508,511 
bleeding 75, 85, 131, 505 
contractions 107, 310 
tumors and cysts 30, 498 - 499 
prolapse 85, 106, 197 
uttara karma 204 
uttarabasti 193 
uvulitis 78, 186,197 


V 

vacha 107 

vaginal 95, 98,132,190,246,508 

vaginitis 92,112 

vagotonic 94 

va ik rant bhasma 328 

Vaiswanara 348 

vajikarana 7 

vajra nadl 270 

vajroll mudra 266 

Vala 327 

valerian 89,104 

valeriana wallichii DC. 104 

vam mantra 315 

vamaka 186 

vamana/vaman 34, 185 - 190, 203 
vamanopaga 186 
vamsha (lochana) 108 
varahlkand 108 

varicose veins 272, 274, 280, 301 
varnya lepa 246 
varsha 40, 333 

vartmagata-roga-vijnaniya/eyelids 72, 105, 197, 
440 - 442 
vasa/vasaka 109 
vasant 40, 333 
Vastu Shastra 322, 563 
Vata 

SEE Vayu vata-shonita or 
vata-rakta 
SEE gout 
vata-vyadhi 

SEE nervous system 
vatari 85 
vatashthlla 

SEE prostate (enlarged) 
vatsnabh 109 

Vayu 14 - 21, 25 - 27, 29, 31 - 35,40 - 42, 44 - 48, 
50-51,495 

food 123 - 124, 126 - 127, 129 - 132,134, 137, 
141. 143 , 145 . 155 , 158 ,163 
herbs 70 - 72, 79, 84 - 86 , 88 , 92, 94,98,100, 
103- 105,108, 111, 

VedaVyasa3 
Vedantic 346 
Vedas 3, 13, 346 





Index 


Vedic Astrology/Jyotish 3, 322,324 - 325,560 - 
563 

vegetable asphalt 103 
vegetable juice 154 
vegetables 129,134 - 139 
vegetarianism 63, 128 
veins 31 
velvet leaf 94 

venereal diseases 74, 80, 86 , 92, 98, 135, 524 

vermicide 120 

vermifuge 97, 99,120 

vertebrae 267, 269, 298 

vertigo 72, 99, 104, 155, 174,462 

vessels and cooking 556 

vidahga 110 

vidarl-kanda 110 

vidradhi 

SEE abscess 

vignanamaya kosha/knowledge cell 345 

vigor 134, 148, 235, 293 

vikriti 14, 35, 43 - 46, 48 - 49, 52, 56 

vilambika 376 

vilepl 188 

vinegar 152 

viola odorata linn. 106 

vipaka 20, 61, 124 

viral disorders 186 

vlrasana 265 

virat 348 

virechana 34,189 - 191, 197 
virtue 250 

viruses 130, 133 - 134, 250 
vlrya 20, 60, 123 
viryalpata 

SEE impotence 
visasana 265 
visceral obstructions 95 
visceral organs 271,281,287 
vishagara-vairodh tantra 7 

vishamagni 18 
Vishnu 106, 317 
vishuddha chakra 317 

vision 111, 130,137,145,150,157,197, 243 
visuchika/gastro enteritis 186,376 
viswa 348 
vital breath 27 - 30 


vital force, deranged 31 
vital organs 541 

vitality 132 - 134, 273 - 274, 287, 292, 295, 315, 
321, 323, 326, 328, 332 
lower 41, 154, 323 

vitamin 129, 131, 134, 137 - 140, 142,151 - 152, 

158 -160 

A 132,135 - 139,141 - 144,159 - 160 
B-complex 135 - 138, 140 - 144, 159 - 160 
C 72,130 - 132,134 - 140,159 - 160 
D 135,159- 160 
E 135,138 - 140,150,159 - 160 
vitamin deficiencies 138 
vitex negundo linn. 97 
vitiligo 

SEE leukoderma 

voice 46,79, 95,109,145,150,153,158,176, 
195, 197 - 202, 242, 246, 262, 293, 355 
vomiting 28, 30 - 31, 34, 41 - 42, 50, 364 
babies 516 

food 130 - 132,134,140,150 - 151,154 - 158, 
161 

herbs 71 -72,76,78 - 79, 83 - 85, 88, 96 - 97, 
99,107 - 109 

pancha karma 170 - 171, 173, 185 - 189 , 246 
pregnancy 83 
vrana 

SEE wounds 

vriddhi/enlarged scrotum 184, 192, 493 
vulnerary 77, 88, 92,120 
Vyan Vayu 16, 110 

vyayama/exercise 173 - 174, 208, 335 - 336 


W 

wa lk s 174 

wall relaxation pose/postpartum asanas 302 
wall squatting pose/pregnancy yoga 299 
wall-boat/postpartum asanas 303 
wall-single leg stretch/pregnancy yoga 300 
walnuts 144 

Walt Whitman 13 
warts 104, 479 
waste 31, 235, 288 

wasting 50, 80, 92, 94, 99,101,103,109,130 - 







The Ayurveda Encyclopedia 


131,144, 149, 264, 328,474 
SEE ALSO TB (pulmonary) 
water 154, 331 

metabolism 23, 27 - 30,74,152,315 
retention 95, 136, 139, 172 
watercress 139 
watermelon 132 

weakness 99,101, 111, 126,130,147,152,159, 
161,170, 266 

digestion 132,146,151,153 - 154,157 - 158 
weeds 584 

weight 41,68,73, 90,109, 111, 127,130- 131,135 
- 137,139 - 140,143,147,153,167,170,195, 
209 - 210,252, 310 - 311, 323,326,335- 336, 
358, 363, 389 - 390,435,474, 513, 574 
wheat 140 
wheezing 285 

white blood cell count - increases 70, 87, 90, 207 

white flour 141 

white leadwort 82 

white musali 103 

white sugar 150,152 

whooping cough 87 

wide leg spine twist - pregnancy yoga 300 
wild violet 106 
will 315 

wine 153, 470 - 473, 553 

winter cherry 75 

wisdom 88 , 317 

withania somnifera dunal. 75 

women 241, 503 - 511 

woodfordia floribunda salisb. 84 

worms 72,77, 81 - 82, 88 , 88 , 90,92, 96 - 100, 

108,110,113,117,120,132,136,155 - 156, 
176,179,198 - 199, 202 
intestinal 92,110,135, 138 
ringworm 78, 81, 144 
round 91, 100, 130, 144 
tapeworm 100,133,144 
worry 123,155, 251 

wounds 77, 82, 84 - 85, 88 ,94, 96,105,149 - 151, 
199,403 - 407 

wrinkles 149,198, 208, 235, 243, 261, 274 - 275, 
288, 296 
wrists 271,273 


X 

x-ray radiation 130 


Y 

yakrit janya raktalplata/sickle cell anemia 358 - 
359 

yam 109, 138 - 139 

yama and niyama 33, 257, 341 - 342 

yashtlmadhu/licorice 111 

yawn 31 

yeast infections 34, 96, 143, 147 
SEE ALSO Candida 
yellow sapphire 324 - 325, 327 - 328 
yellow topaz 324, 329 

yoga 88, 141,143 - 144, 153, 155, 174, 257 - 311 
children 304 

digestive disorders 309 - 310 
elderly & handicapped 308 - 309 
office 305 - 308 
post-partum 301 - 304 
pregnancy 298 - 301 
SEE ALSO hatha yoga 
YogaVani 291, 338 
yogaraj guggul 70 
yogic 223 
yogic diet 150 
yogis 105 
yogurt 147,153 
yoni mudra 260, 296 - 297 
yonivyapat 503 - 506 
SEE female reproductive 
young 145, 170 
yusha 188 


Z 

zanthoxylum alatum roxb. 105 
zinc 46, 137, 158, 161 - 162 
zircon ash 328 
zucchini 138 





Index 


“ Oh, East is East, and West is West, 
and never the twain shall meet, 

Till earth and sky stand presently at 
God’s great Judgment Seat. 

But there is neither East nor West, 
border, nor breed, nor birth, 
when two strong men stand face to face, 
though they come from the ends of earth!” 


Kipling - The Ballad of East and West 






AVWerla 

Encyclopedia 

Natural Secrets to 
Healing, Prevention, & Longevity 

This book contains all the ingredients for a healthy life. 

“ ...the most comprehensive , clear and user friendly resource book 
on Ayurveda available today. Swami Tirtha has done us all a great service 
by compiling this thorough and reliable reference... 
provides western medical translations and a valuable glossary. ” 

Joseph Loizza, M.D. 

Director, Columbia Presbyterian Center for Meditation and Healing 
Healthcare Project Director/Dharam Hinduja India Research Center 

“...encyclopedia is exactly what this book is. 

The appendix is a book in itself...I took an eight-week course on Ayurveda 
and the course text book was not even close to being as comprehensive 
as the Ayurveda Encyclopedia...you definitely need this book. 

The depth and mass of information available here will undoubtedly 
teach you something new on this ancient healing system. ” 

Alternative Healthcare Management - March 1999 

The most complete and in-depth book on Ayurveda with photographs of 
85 major Ayurvedic herbs, and 89 photographs on 
Ayurvedic hatha yoga poses for general health, pregnancy, and seniors. 

Ayurveda is the science of healing, prevention and longevity. 

Healing is unique according to personal constitution (dosha), treating the 
root-cause of disorders and offering inexpensive therapies free from side effects. 

For families, medical and holistic practitioners, 
pharmacists and professors. 


$39.95 US 


ISBN 0-9658042-2-4 


9 780965 804226 


5 3995 






































